                       Unnesting Arbitrary Queries
                         ThomasNeumannandAlfonsKemper
                                         ¨  ¨
                          Technische Universitat Xunchen
                               Xunich, Germany
                        neumann@in.tum.de, kemper@in.tum.de
            Abstraft: SQL-99 allows for nested subqueries at nearly all places within aquery.
            From auser’spoint of view, nested queries can greatly simplify the formulation of
            complexqueries. `owever, nested queries that are correlated with the outer queries
            frequently lead to dependent joins with nested loops evaluations and thus poor perfor-
            mance.
              Existing systems therefore use anumber of heuristics to unnest these queries, i.e.,
            de-correlate them. These unnesting techniques can greatly speed up query processing,
            butare usually limited to certain classes of queries. To the best of our knowledge
            no existing system can de-correlate queries in the general case. We present ageneric
            approach for unnesting arbitrary queries. As aresult, the de-correlated queries allow
            for much simpler and much more efﬁcient query evaluation.
       1Introduftion
       Subqueries are frequently used in SQL queries to simplify query formulation. Consider
       for our running examples the following schema:
          • students: {[id, name, major,year,...]}
          • exams: {[sid, course, curriculum, date, ...]}
       Then the following is anested query to ﬁnd for each student the best exams waccording to
       the German grading system where lower numbers are better):
          QpA smlmqt sFnammumFqoursm
              from   studmnts sumxams m
              whmrm sFidnmFsid and
                     mFkradmn(smlmqt min(m?Fkradm)
                              from mxams m?
                              whmrm sFidnm?Fsid)
       Conceptually,for each student, exam pair 2s3e:it determines, in the subquery,whether or
       not this particular exam e has the best grade of all exams of this particular student s.
       From aperformance point of viewthe query is not so nice, as the subquery has to be re-
       evaluated for every student, exam pair.From atechnical perspective the query contains a
                                    7B7
       dependent join,i.e., anested loop join where the evaluation of the right hand side depends
       onthecurrent value of the left-hand side. These joins are highly inefﬁcient, and lead to wat
       least) quadratic execution time.
       Database management systems wDBXSs) therefore internally rewrite the query to elimi-
       nate the correlation. ASQL representation of this rewrite would look likethis:
          Qp’A smlmqt sFnammumFqoursm
               from   studmnts sumxams mu
                      (smlmqt m?Fsid as idu min(m?Fkradm) as bmst
                       from mxams m?
                       kroup by m?Fsid) m
               whmrm sFidnmFsid and mFidnsFid and
                      mFkradmnmFbmst
       `ere,theevaluationofthesubquerynolongerdependsonthevaluesofs,andthusregular
       joins can be used. This kind of unnesting is very important for good query performance,
       butexisting techniques cannot handle arbitrary queries. Forexample the subsequent SQL
       queryisveryhardtode-correlate. ItdeterminestheexamsthataCSorGamesEngineering
       student should repeat in the future because he or she underachievedincomparison to the
       average grade of exams taken by him/her or taken by elder peers:
          Q?A
          smlmqt sFnammu mFqoursm
          from   studmnts su mxams m
          whmrm sFidnmFsid and
            (sFmajor n’CS’ or sFmajor n’Gamms Enk’) and
            mFkradm>n(smlmqt avk(m?Fkradm)+p 33onm kradm worsm
                      from mxams m?           33than thm avmrakm kradm
                      whmrm sFidnm?Fsid or    33of mxams takmn by
                            (m?FqurriqulumnsFmajor and 33him/hmr or takmn
                            sFymar>m?Fdatm))            33by mldmr pmmrs
       To the best of our knowledge, no existing system can unnest such aquery.And indeed,
       unnesting this query is hard: Standard unnesting techniques rely upon the fact that at-
       tributes available within the query can be used to substitute the free variables determined
       bythe outer query.This is not the case here, sFymar for example cannot be substituted.
       So clearly this kind of complicated correlated query will be more expensive to evaluate
       than amore simple subquery.`owever,aswewill show, it is indeed possible to unnest
       even this query.Wewill have to spend extra effort to derive the value of sFymar and
       sFmajor,but we can do so without adependent join. And the extra effort we will have
       to spend is bound by the cost of the dependent join. Xost queries will be dramatically
       moreefﬁcientinthedecorrelatedform,intheworstcasewewillhavethesomejoineffort.
       That is, our unnesting approach will deﬁnitely not incur higher costs than the straight-
       forward nested loops evaluation ±and in the majority of cases improve the performance
       dramatically,often by several orders of magnitude. Furthermore, even the worst case is
                                    7B>
        mostlikely awin, as eliminating dependent joins allows for more efﬁcient join implemen-
        tations. Our contribution can thus be seen as auniversally applicable technique for unnest-
        ing anykind of nested subquery ±incontrast to the special case treatments published and
        implemented so far. The universal unnesting technique has been fully implemented in
        our main-memory database system `yPer [KN11] and can be experienced via our web
        interface hypmr3dbFdm that visualizes the resulting query plans.
        And the typical performance gains of query unnesting are immense: Depending on the
        query,itreplaces an O2nB: algorithm wnested loop join) with an O2n: algorithm whash
        join, joining keys). Furthermore the dependent side is executed for every outer tuple in
        the nested case, butonly once in the unnested case. On large data sets it is easy to get a
        factor 10 or even 100 performance improvement by unnesting, which makes unnesting an
        essential technique for query compilation. There are afew cases where nested evaluation
        is actually beneﬁcial, in particular if the outer side is very small and the inner side can be
        evaluated using an indexlookup, butthat should be triggered by aconscious decision of
        the query optimizer,not by the waythe query is formulated. By default, queries should be
        unnested completely.
        Therest of this paper is structured as follows: We ﬁrst deﬁne the notation used in this pa-
        per in Section 2. Then, in Section 3the algebraic unnesting transformations are speciﬁed.
        Section 4covers further optimisation rules that are applicable in special cases we.g., when
        functional dependencies can be inferred). Section 5isdevoted to a“cursory” performance
        evaluation that analyses some other well-known DBXSs to our `yPer system which in-
        corporates the unnesting described. Finally,wesurvey the related work and conclude the
        paper.
        =Preliminaries
        Before looking at the unnesting techniques, we brieﬂy repeat some deﬁnitions for rela-
        tional algebra, as the notation is not standardized beyond the basic operators.
        First, we have the regular (inner) join,which is simply deﬁned as cross product followed
        byaselection:
           T B T    := σ 2T AT :.
            1  p  B      p  1   B
        It computes the combination of all matching entries from T1 and TB.Itisused in most
        SQL queries, butits deﬁnition is not sufﬁcient in the presence of correlated subqueries.
        The subquery has to be evaluated for every tuple of the outer query,therefore we deﬁne
        the dependent join as
           T C T    := {t ◦t |t ∈ T ∧t ∈T 2t :∧p2t ◦t :}.
            1  p  B       1  B 1   1   B   B 1     1  B
                                        7B5
          `ere, the right hand side is evaluated for every tuple of theleft hand side. We denote
          the attributes produced by an expression T by A2T:,and free variables occurring in an
          expression T by F2T:.Toevaluate the dependent join, F2T : ⊆A2T:must hold, i.e.,
                                                                  B        1
          the attributes required by TB must be produced by T1.
          Note that in this paper we sometimes explicitly mention natural join in the join predicate
          to simplify the notation. We assume that all relations occuring in aquery will have unique
          attribute names, even if theyreference the same physical table, thus K B I ≡ K A I.
          `owever, if we explicitly reference the same relation name twice, and call for the natu-
          ral join, then the attribute columns with the same name are compared, and the duplicate
          columns are projected out. Consider,for example:
                                  2KBC:Bp∧naturaljoinC 2I BC:
          `ere, the top-most join checks both the predicate p and compares the columns of C that
          comefrombothsideswandeliminates one of the twocopies of C’s columns).
          ForsemijoinswN),antijoinswT),andouterjoinswE,K)wedeﬁnethedependentvariants
          accordinglywO3U3F3L),againtheright-handsideisevaluatedforeverytupleoftheleft-
          hand side.
          Besides the join operators, we have the group by operator as additional important operator
              Γ     2e::={x◦2a:f2y::|x∈Π 2e:∧y={z|z ∈e∧∀a∈K:x.a=z.a}}
               B;aEf                              B
          It groups its input e wi.e., abase relation or arelation computed from another algebra
          expression) by K,and evaluates one wor more comma separated) aggregation functionws)
          to compute aggregated attributes. If K is empty,just one aggregation tuple is produced ±
          as in SQL with amissing group by-clause.
          We can evaluate functions wand thus construct newattributes) by evaluating the map oper-
          ator
              χaEf2e::={x◦2a:f2x::|x∈e}.
          Besidesthese, we need the regular relational algebra operators wσ3A3Π3ρ3∪3∩3\). Using
          these operators, we can translate SQL queries into relational algebra.
          In the following we will often have to compare sets of attributes. As ashorthand notation,
          wedeﬁnetheattribute comparison operator =B as
              t1 =B tB  := ∀a∈B : t1.a = tB.a.
          Notethatunlessindicatedotherwisethisoperatorhasissemantics, i.e., it compares NULL
          values as equal.
                                                 7B6
            3Unnesting
            The algebraic representation of aquery with correlated subqueries winitially) results in a
            dependent join, i.e., an expression of the form
                                                      T1 Cp TB.
            As already mentioned, these dependent joins are very unfortunate from aperformance
            perspective,and we want to eliminate them. Fundamentally,wemanipulate the algebraic
            expression until the right hand side no longer depends on the left hand side, and thus
            the dependent join can be transformed into aregular join. We achieve this using two
            techniques that we will discuss in the following. First, we try a simple unnesting, that
            handles cases where dependencies are created just for syntactic reasons. If that is not
            sufﬁcient to unnest the query,weuse the general unnesting framework that can handle
            arbitrary complexqueries.
            3A1   Simple Unnesting
            Sometimesqueriescontaincorrelatedsubqueriesjustbecausetheyaresimplertoformulate
            in SQL. An example for that is TPC-` Query 21, which contains aconstruct similar to the
            fragment
                smlmqt FFF
                from       linmitmm lp FFF
                whmrm mxists (smlmqt *
                                        from linmitmm l?
                                        whmrm l?Fl_ordmrkmy nlpFl_ordmrkmy)
                FFF
            This is translated into an algebra expression of the form
                                             l1 O 2σl1.okeyIl2.okey2lB::
            It is easy to see that this fragment can be unnested by moving the dependent predicate up
            the tree, transforming the dependent join into aregular join:
                                               l  N                 2l :
                                                1   l1.okeyIl2.okey   B
            Ingeneralthesimpleunnestingphasemovesalldependentpredicatesupthealgebratreeas
            faraspossible, potentially beyond joins, selections, group by,etc., until it reaches apoint
            where all its attributes are available from the input. If this happens the dependent join can
            be transformed into aregular join, as shown by the equivalence explained above.Note
            that this predicate pull-up happens purely for decorreleation reasons. Further optimization
            steps might push wparts of) the predicate back down again to ﬁlter tuples early on.
                                                          7B7
           3A=   General Unnesting
           Predicate movement is very easy to implement and already sufﬁcient to handle frequently
           occuring simply nested queries. Therefore we try it ﬁrst, butfor the general case we need
           amorecomplexapproach: First, we translate the dependent join into a“nicer” dependent
           join wi.e., one that is easier to manipulate), and second, we will push the newdependent
           join down into the query until we can transform it into aregular join.
           Thus, in the ﬁrst step, we use the following equivalence
                T1 Cp TB     ≡ T1Bp∧T1I           D2ECTB:
                                             A(D)
           where E := ΠF7T2)∩A7T1)2T1:.
           At aﬁrst glance this transformation did not improve the query plan much, as we have
           replaced one dependent join by aregular join and another dependent join. `owever, at
           asecond glance this transformation is very helpful: In the original expression, we had
           to evaluate TB for every tuple of T1,which could be millions. Therefore, in the second
           expression, we ﬁrst compute the domain E of all variable bindings, evaluate TB only once
           for every distinct variable binding, and then use aregular join to match the results to the
           original T1 value. If there are alot of duplicates, this already greatly reduces the number
           of invocations of TB.
           This beneﬁt can be illustrated by considering our ﬁrst example query for determining the
           best examws) for every student. The straightforward evaluation computes the student’sbest
           grade for every exam he or she has ever taken, i.e.:
                                 σe.gradeIm22students s Bs.idIe.sid exams e: C
                                   2Γ∅;mEmin7eB.grade)2σs.idIeB.sid exams e2:::
           The equivalence rule allows to restrict the computation of the best grades to each student
           ±instead of computing it redundantly for each wstudent, exam)-pair.Thus, the dependent
           join is executed on the projection of the students’ id only,i.e.:
                                 ...Π         22students s B             examse:C
                                      d.idEs.id               s.idIe.sid
                                   2Γ                   2σd.idIeB.sid exams e2:::
                                      ∅;mEmin7eB.grade)
           The application of the “Push-Down”-rule for our example query is shown in Figure 1
           where the entire query evaluation plan is graphically depicted. In away,this constitutes
           aside-ways information passing from the outer wleft) join argument to the inner wright)
           argument in order to eliminate redundancyinthe evaluation. Therefore, it is important
           to implement theprojection in the true, duplicate-eliminating semantics and not in the
           duplicate-preserving multi-set semantics of SQL.
           Even more importantly,wehavetransformed agenericdependent join into adependent
           join of a set wi.e., arelation without duplicates). Knowing that E contains no duplicates
                                                         7BB
                                                                            σe.gradeIm
                             σe.gradeIm                                      B
                                                                               s.idId.id
                                   C                                                       C
                    B              Γ                       ⇒                  Π             Γ∅;mEmin7eB.grade)
                      s.idIe.sid     ∅;mEmin7eB.grade)                          d.idEs.id
                           examse σ                                B                            σ
               students s                s.idIeB.sid                 s.idIe.sid                   d.idIeB.sid
                                        examse2              students s exams e                  examse2
                             Figure 1: Example Application of Dependent Join “Push-Down”
            helps in moving the dependent join further down into the query.Inthe following we will
            assume that anyrelation named E is duplicate free, and in the following equivalences we
            only consider dependent joins where the left hand side is aset. `owever, we emphasize
            that this optimization technique for nested queries does preservethe SQL multi-set seman-
            tics. All duplicates ±contained in the base relations as well as generated by the query ±
            are retained in the optimized plans; only the set E that constrains the evaluation work of
            the nested subquery is duplicate free. If duplicates are to be removedwbecause of adistinct
            clause in the query) we can further exploit this by pushing duplicate elimination down into
            the query evaluation plan.
            Theultimategoalofourdependentjoinpush-downistoreachastatewheretherighthand
            side no longer depends on the left hand side, i.e.,
                 ECT ≡ EBT if F2T:∩A2E:=∅.
            In this case we still have to perform ajoin, butatleast we can perform aregular join
            instead of the highly inefﬁcient dependent join. And, as we will see, we can always reach
            this state. An even nicer goal would be to reach astate where the resulting regular join can
            be substituted by existing attributes, eliminating the join altogether.Wewill discuss that
            in Section 4.
            `aving explained the start and the goal of our dependent join push down, we nowlook at
            individual operators. Forselections, apush-down is very simple:
                 ECσp2TB: ≡ σp2ECTB:.
            This transformation might look unusual, as we usually want to push selections down, but
            that is besides the point of our unnesting transformation: We ﬁrst push the dependent join
            down as faraspossible, until it can either be eliminated completely due to substitution,
            or until it can be transformed into aregular join. Once all dependent joins have been
            eliminated we can use the regular techniques likeselection push-down and join reordering
            to re-optimize the transformed query.
            Pushing adependent join down another join is more complex, as potentially both sides
                                                           7B9
                could depend upon the dependent join
                                                    2ECT1:BpTB                                                     :   F2TB:∩A2E:=∅
                      EC2T B T :≡ T B 2ECT::F2T:∩A2E:=∅
                                 1    p    B              1 p                B                                                 1
                                                    2ECT:B                                       2ECT ::otherwise.
                                                                   1 p∧naturaljoin D                         B
                If the values provided by the dependent join are only required on one side we push it to
                the corresponding side, otherwise we wave to replicate it in both sides. Note that this
                push-down rule is overly pessimistic, we can often simplify the parts belowthe join wsee
                Section 4), butwestick to the basic push-down for now. If we pushed the dependent join
                to both sides we have to augment the join predicate such that both sides are matched on
                the E values. Note that the replication is not aperformance penalty relative to the original
                expression, in both cases T1 and TB are evaluated |E| times.
                For outer joins we always have to replicate the dependent join if the inner side depends on
                it, as otherwise we cannot keep track of unmatched tuples from the outer side.
                      EC2T E T :≡- 2ECT1:EpTB                                                                        :   F2TB:∩A2E:=∅
                                 1     p   B            2ECT:E                                     2ECT ::otherwise.
                                                                   1      p∧natural join D                    B
                      EC2T1KpTB: ≡ 2ECT1:Kp∧naturaljoinD2ECTB:.
                Similar for semi join and anti join:
                                                   - 2ECT :N T                                                     :    F2T :∩A2E:=∅
                      EC2T N T :≡                                 1      p    B                                               B
                                 1    p    B           2ECT:N                                    2ECT ::otherwise.
                                                                  1 p∧naturaljoin D                          B
                                                  - 2ECT :T T                                                    :    F2T :∩A2E:=∅
                      EC2T T T :≡                                1     p    B                                               B
                                 1 p B                2ECT:T                                    2ECT ::otherwise.
                                                                 1 p∧natural join D                        B
                When pushing the dependent join down a group-by operator,the group-operator must
                preserveall attributes produces by the dependent join
                      EC2ΓB;aEf2T:: ≡ Γ                                     2ECT:
                                                            B∪A7D);aEf
                Again, this makes use of the fact that E is aset.
                Theprojection behavessimilar to the group by operator
                      EC2ΠB2T:: ≡ Π                                2ECT:
                                                        B∪A7D)
                Theonlymissing operators are the set operations
                                                                              79G
                                      σe.gradeIm
                                          C
                              B             Γ
                                s.idIe.sid   ∅;mEmin7eB.grade)
                                   examse     σ
                           students s          s.idIeB.sid
                                               examse2
                                Figure 2: Original Query Q1
            EC2T1∪TB: ≡ 2ECT1:∪2ECTB:
            EC2T1∩TB: ≡ 2ECT1:∩2ECTB:
            EC2T1\TB: ≡ 2ECT1:\2ECTB:
        Using these transformations, each dependent join is either eliminated at some point by
        substitution, or ends up in front of abase relation, in which case it can be transformed into
        anon-dependent join. Thus, the dependent join can be eliminated from anyquery.
        One potential concern for this approach could be that E might become very large, as it
        is the set of all variable bindings for the nested subquery.But fortunately that is not the
        case. Note that, if the original nested join was T C T ,then |E|≤|T|.Thus, if wafter
                                             1    B            1
        decorrelating the subquery), the top-most join is ahash-join which stores T1 in ahash
        table, the memory consumption for that join is at most doubled by computing E.And
        that is the absolute worst case. If we knowthat the values from T1 are duplicate free,
        for example because theycontain akey,wecan even avoid materializing E and read the
        join hash table instead, removing anyoverhead. On the plus side we have transformed
        an O2nB: operation into an wideally) O2n: operation, which is well worth the memory
        overhead.
        3A3  Optimization of Example Query Q1
        As illustrational example, consider the algebraic translation of Query Q1 in Figure 2. It
        uses adependent join to compute the nested subquery,and afterwards uses the produced
        attribute m to check the ﬁlter condition.
        Thesubsequent transformations are shown in Figure 3to7.First, the top-most dependent
        join is transformed into aregular join plus adependent join with the domain of the free
                                         79D
                                  σe.gradeIm
                                   B
                                    s.idId.id
                                              C
                                   Π            Γ
                                    d.idEs.id    ∅;mEmin7eB.grade)
                          B                       σ
                            s.idIe.sid             d.idIeB.sid
                       students s exams e          examse2
                           Figure 3: Query Q1, Transformation Step 1
                                     σe.gradeIm
                                      B
                                       s.idId.id
                                          Γ
                                           d.id;mEmin7eB.grade)
                                                 C
                                          Π      σd.idIeB.sid
                                            d.idEs.id
                             B                    examse2
                               s.idIe.sid
                          students s exams e
                           Figure 4: Query Q1, Transformation Step 2
                                      σe.gradeIm
                                      B
                                        s.idId.id
                                          Γ
                                           d.id;mEmin7eB.grade)
                                              σ
                                               d.idIeB.sid
                                                 C
                                           Π       examse2
                                            d.idEs.id
                              B
                               s.idIe.sid
                          students s exams e
                           Figure 5: Query Q1, Transformation Step 3
                                         799
                                      σe.gradeIm
                                      B
                                        s.idId.id
                                          Γ
                                           d.id;mEmin7eB.grade)
                                              σ
                                               d.idIeB.sid
                                                 B
                                           Π       examse2
                                            d.idEs.id
                              B
                               s.idIe.sid
                          students s exams e
                           Figure l: Query Q1, Transformation Step 4
                                      σe.gradeIm
                                      B
                                        s.idId.id
                                          Γ
                                           d.id;mEmin7eB.grade)
                                             B
                                               d.idIeB.sid
                                           Π       examse2
                                            d.idEs.id
                              B
                               s.idIe.sid
                          students s exams e
                Figure 7: Query Q1, Transformation Step 5wpushing selections back down)
                                         797
                                      σe.gradeIm
                                      B
                                        s.idId.id
                                          Γ
                                           d.id;mEmin7eB.grade)
                                              σ
                                               d.idIeB.sid
                                              χd.idEeB.sid
                                               examse2
                              B
                               s.idIe.sid
                          students s exams e
                Figure 8: Query Q1, Optional Transformation Step lwdecoupling both sides)
                                        Πs.name,e.course
                       Be.grade>m91∧7d.idIs.id∨7d.year>e.date∧e.curriculumId.major))
                                                          Γ
                                                           d.id,d.year,d.major;mEavg7eB.grade)
                                                   Bd.idIeB.sid∨7d.year>eB.date∧eB.curriculumI
                                                Π                            examse2
                                                 d.idEs.id,d.yearEs.year,d.majorEs.major
                  B
                    s.idIe.sid
         σ                   examse
          s.majorI...
          students s
                 Figure 9: Query Q2, Optimized Form with Sideways Information Passing
                                         79>
          variables. In the next step the dependent join is pushed down the group by operator,
          extending the aggregation attributes as needed. Afterwards, the dependent join is pushed
          down the selection, ending up in front of atable scan. Nowwecan transform it into
          aregular join, as the right hand side is not dependent on the left hand side. Subsequent
          optimizationswillpushthepredicatesdownagain,introducingaregularjoin,whichresults
          in the plan shown in Figure 7.
          In manycases, and also in this example, it is possible to eliminate the join with the domain
          Ealtogether: If all attributes of the domain are wequi-)joined with existing attributes, we
          can instead derive the domain from the existing attributes. In this example, we knowthat
          d.id = e2.sid holds after the join, therefore we can replace this by amap operator that
          substitutes d.id with e2.sid,asshown in Figure 8. The nice thing about this substitution
          is that the parts of the query are completely independent, no trace of the original nesting
          remains. `owever, substitutioncreatesasupersetoftheoriginaltuples! Atleastingeneral,
          in this example referential integrity will most likely prevent that. But in general dropping
          the join with the domain and substituting instead can lead to larger intermediate results, as
          the ﬁlter effect of the join is removed, too. This does not affect the ﬁnal result, because the
          ﬁlter will still happen at alater stage wat the original dependent join), butitcan affect the
          query runtime. Therefore removing the join is adecision that has to be made by the query
          optimizer wsee Section 4).
          Note that some care is needed when trying to remove σd.idIeB.sid after substitution.It
          wouldbetemptingtosimplydropthisselection, as d.id is derivedfrom e2.sid.But this is
          only safe if e2.sid is not nullable. If e2.sid can assume NULL values, then the selection
          must be preserved wand in fact is simply anot-NULL check).
          3A4   Optimization of Example Query Q=
          Forour motivational query Q2 we illustrate the resulting plan in Figure 9. Note that here
          Ecannot be eliminated, as there is anon-equi join with values from E,which prevents
          substitution. `ere, decoupling the nested subquery evaluation is not possible because the
          value of s.year is notequi-joinded with e2.date.Therefore, the domain of the outer query
          has to be transferred sideways to the nested query evaluation. `owever, note that all de-
          pendent joins have disappeared and were replaced by efﬁcient regular algebraic operators.
          3A5   Anti1Join Example
          Let us discuss an example of adependent anti-join which is used for transforming queries
          that useanSQL all-clause to compare avalue against all values derivedbyawpossibly
          correlated) subquery.Such aquery is formulated belowfor twoabstract relations R :
          {[K3...3X3...]} and S : {[I3...3Y3...]}.
                                                    795
              Q3A    smlmqt RF
                                  *
                     from      R
                     whmrm RFX nall (smlmqt SFY
                                               from S
                                               whmrm SFB nRFA)
          Obviously,itisnot possible to translate this query into adependent join; butitispossible
          to negate the predicate and use adependent anti-join as shown on the left hand side of
          the subsequent ﬁgure. In the course of the unnesting optimization the dependent anti-join
          can be transformed into a“normal” anti-join. The resulting query plan is shown on the
          right-hand side of the subsequent ﬁgure.
                              U                    ⇒             T
                               X4IY                               7X4IY)∧7S.BIR.B)
                      R               σS.BIR.B
                                          S               R                   S
          4Optimizations
          When simple unnesting is successful, it completely eliminates anyhint of correlations
          from the query.That is, the resulting algebra expression looks as if the query had been
          formulated without correlated subqueries. The general unnesting case howeverhas to add
          the projection to compute the domain E,and the join with E,which causes some extra
          costs. Of course computing E is usually still much preferable to anested evaluation, as the
          computation of E and the join with E cause one-time costs, while anested evaluation re-
          sults in quadratic runtime. But still, eliminating E completely is tempting, and sometimes
          possible, as seen in the previous example query Q1 wcf. Figure 8).
          In general, we can eliminate E,ifwecan substitute it with values that already exist in
          the subtree anyway.This is commonly the case with equi-joins, for example the query
          contains the expression E B         R,wecanlearn the possible values of E.a that can
                                     D.aIR.b
          makeittothe original dependent join by inspecting the values of R.b.The emphasized
          part of the statement is important, of course E can contain values that do not exist in R,
          butthese will neverﬁnd ajoin partner and will thus neverreach the original dependent
          join. We can therefore ignore them.
          To decideaboutsubstitutionwemustﬁrstanalyzethequerytreetoﬁndequivalenceclasses
          that are induced by the join and ﬁlter conditions. Forexample aﬁlter condition σaIb
          implies that a and b are in the same equivalence class. We knowthat in the ﬁnal result a
          andbhavethesamevalue,wecanthussubstituteawithb.Computingtheseequivalenceis
          relatively straight forward. One potential cause for problems would be outer joins, which
          can cause a and b to not be equal in the example above,but as the top-most join on E is
          knowntobeNULL-rejectingthis is not an issue here.
                                                   796
        After having identiﬁed the equivalence classes C,wecan decide about apossible substi-
        tution as shown below:
           ECT ⊆ χ        2T: if ∃I ⊆A2T::A2E:≡ I.
                     A7D)EB                    C
        Thus,insteadofjoiningwithE,wecanextendT wusingthemapoperator)andcomputethe
        implied attribute value from E by using the equivalent attributes. Note that this only holds
        because E is aset. Note further that substitution might increase the size of intermediate
        results, the relationship between the twoformulations is not = but ⊆.This cardinality
        increase is caused by losing the wpotential) pruning power of the join with E.Instead of
        evaluating the formed correlated subtree with every tuple in T that will ﬁnd ajoin partner
        in E,weevaluate with every tuple from T.The tuples that do not have join partners will
        wonly) be eliminated higher up in the tree, when the original dependent join is executed,
        butthe intermediate results can be larger.
        Therefore, substitution only pays offifthe join with E is unselective.InQuery Q1 that
        will be the case, therefore it is agood idea to use substitution, butingeneral the query
        optimization has to compare the costs of both alternativesand chose the cheaper one. For
        selective joins, it is better to keep E and thus eliminate tuples as early as possible.
        5Evaluation
        Unnesting correlated subqueries can lead to nearly arbitrary gains, as it can transform an
        O2nB: into an wideally) O2n: operation. Demonstrating afactor 100 improvement for
        example would be easy with acarefully constructed query.But the examples and the
        resulting factors would all be abit arbitrary.Instead, we therefore ﬁrst compare the ex-
        pressiveness of our technique with that of other systems, and then give some performance
        numbers for TPC-`. All experiments were run on an Intel i7-3930K with l4GB main
        memory.
        Wehaveimplementedtheunnestinginour`yPer[KN11]system,andcomparedittoother
        approaches. First, we studied the unnesting capabilities of several database systems. Out
        of the commercial systems, SQL Server seems to have the best unnesting engine, which
        is to be expected based on the publication [GJ01] of the the XS SQL Server team. Un-
        fortunately the licensing terms for SQL Server 2014 forbid publishing runtime numbers,
        therefore we will only qualitatively describe the result. We also ran experiments on Post-
        greSQL 9.1, where we are allowed to publish numbers. As test data for our twoexample
        queries we generated 1,000 student and 10,000 exam tuples, i.e., 10 exams per student.
        This is asmall data set, butthe effects of unnesting are so extreme that we did not want
        to increase the data set size. wRoughly speaking, the gains of our method growquadratic
        with the size of the relations, so we could demonstrate arbitrary gains by increasing the
        data set size).
        Query 1isrelatively simple to unnest. Our `yPer system unnests the query and uses
        substitution, which result in aruntime of R1ms. Without unnesting the query takes 51ms
        on`yper.SQLServer2014alsounneststhisquery.Wearenotallowedtoreportruntimes,
                                     797
     butthe query plan is reasonable. PostgreSQL howeverwas not able to unnest even this
     relatively simple case, which results in aruntime of 1,300ms. And this runtime grows
     very sharply as the data size grows. If, however, the query would have been formulated
     decorrelated, as formulated as query Q1′ in the Introduction, then PostgreSQL could have
     executed it in 17ms. This demonstrates howimportant it is to unnest subqueries.
     Query2ismoredifﬁculttounnest,andwearenotawareofanysystembesidesour`yPer
     system that is able to unnest it. `yPer can execute that query in 42ms w408ms without
     unnesting). SQL Server 2014 is not able to unnest this query and generates an execution
     plan with nested loop joins. We are not allowed to report the runtime, butobviously one
     cannot expect good runtime in aplan with large nested loop joins. PostgreSQL needs
     12,099ms for the query,again growing sharply with the data size.
     The queries in TPC-` are not that difﬁcult to unnest, and all of the large commercial
     systems are able to unnest them. This is indeed absolutely essential, as shown by the
     followingperformancenumbersobtainedfromour`yPersystemthatallowsto“switchon
     andoff”theunnesting. EvenatSF =1,theruntimeofQuery4is7mswithunnesting,and
     157,l1lmswithout. Thisisadifferenceofseveralordersofmagnitude,andhighlightsthat
     unnesting is absolutely essential. Other queries are affected, too: Forexample Query 17
     takes 9ms with unnesting, and 4,ll4ms without. Of course every vendor makes sure that
     the well known TPC-` queries are correctly unnested in their system, butthese numbers
     highlight that the performance impact is so large, that asystem should be able to unnest
     arbitrary queries, as proposed in this paper.
     6RelatedWork
     Theﬁrst, seminal paper on optimization of nested subqueries waspublished by WonKim
     [Kim82]. It provides “recipes” wi.e., transformation rules) for unnesting particular nested
     query patterns which were integrated in manycommercial database systems. Agood sur-
     vey of those techniques wasgiven by Jarkeand Koch [JK84]. Werner Kiessling [Kie85]
     addressed the correctness problems of some of the suggested transformations when empty
     sets are encountered. Formany, butnot all, cases he wasable to correctly formulate ef-
     fective unnesting transformations. Thus unnesting remained an active ﬁeld of research, in
     particular because of the SQL language extensions that orthogonally allowed nested sub-
     queries in all of the select-from-where-clauses. In the Nineties, Seshadri et al. [SPL9l]
     formulated complexquery decorrelationa rules. Dayal’spaper [Day87] focuses on efﬁ-
     ciently evaluating subqueries utilizing outer joins. The outer joins walso extensively used
     in our transformation rules) can be optimized using transformation/equivalence rules de-
     veloped by Galindo-Legaria and Rosenthal [GR97].
     Oracle’ssubquery optimizations are described by Bellamkonda et. al. [BAW909]. They
     developed amultitude of subquery optimization techniques, auch as unnesting, group-by
     merging, commonsubexpression elimination, join predicate pushdown, join factorization,
     anti-join formulations of set minus and intersection queries, etc. Xanyofthese techniques
     are appliedaspreprocessingtransformationsinaheuristicspattern-matchingway±and,as
                      79B
       it appears, are particularly tuned for optimizing “TPC-`-style” queries. In this paper,we
       developed ageneralized approach that tackles the problem in auniform wayand achieves
       similar optimization effects as the special-purpose pattern-matching approaches ±asour
       “best of breed” TPC-` performance results reveal [LBKN14].
       The Tandem approach for unnesting queries is described by Celis and Zeller [CZ97]. At
       about the same time, in the context of the Xicrosoft SL Server,Galindo-Legaria and Joshi
       [GJ01] introduced the apply-operator,that is similar to our bind join, for “algebrizing”
       SQLquerieswithnestedsubqueries. `owever, their work fell short of being able to trans-
       form all possible nesting patterns: “Bchieving optimality and syntax-independence in this
       class (subqueries that areremoved by introducing additional common subexpressions) re-
       quires an understanding of the plan space and mechanisms to generate plans of interest,
       for queries with common subexpressions, whichwebelieve requires additional research”.
       We are conﬁdent that our paper closes this cited “research gap”. Graefe’sBTW-paper
       [Gra03] discusses Xicrosoft SQL Server’sapproach to evaluate nested queries that could
       not be unnested ±which wasneeded when unnesting failed.
       Aparticular query pattern, i.e., scalar subqueries in the presence of disjunctions, wasopti-
       mizedbyBrantner,XayandXoerkotte[BXX07]usinganalgebrawithbypassoperators
       [KXPS94]. Anotherimportantspecialcaseofunnestingqueriesinvolvinglargefacttables
                           ¨
       is addressed by Akinde and Bohlen [AB03]. Theyargue that outer joins are too costly in
       OLAPenvironmentswithverylarge fact tables and, instead, propose ageneralized multi-
       dimensional join operator GXDJ.
       In the late Nineties, several groups worked on algebra extension to capture nested sub-
       queries. Some of the work wasperformed in the context of the object-oriented/object
       relational models [SAB94] that exhibits data nesting and therefore requires ﬂattening and
       nesting of these structures. One of the ﬁrst proposals for such an object query algebra
       wasformulated by Cluet and Xoerkotte [CX93] and later expanded by Wang, Xaier and
       Shapiro [WXS99]. Cao and Badia [CB05] proposed the explicit use of nested relations to
       evaluate nested subqueries.
       The Virtuoso system [Erl12] tries to address the problem of nested queries at runtime,
       by evaluating the nested query not once for every outer tuple, butonce batch of outer
       tuples, similar to ablock-wise nested loop join, greatly reducing the cost of nested eval-
       uation. During batched execution, each tuple carries a“set number” between operators,
       maintaining an association between the intermediate results and the vector of inputs of the
       subquery [Erl14]. While not as powerful as aquery-optimizer based solution, this is much
       moreefﬁcient than the standard nested-loop evaluation of nested queries.
       Ourside-waysinformationpassingoptimizationtoreducetheamountofworkincurredby
       evaluatingthenestedsubquerywtree)resemblesthemagicsettransformationsthatwerede-
                           9
       scribed by Seshadri et al [S`P 9l] in the context of the IBX DB2 system. Consequently,
       in our graphics interface wwwwFhypmr3dbFdm)fordisplayingthequeryevaluationplans
       the corresponding operator is called magic.
                                   799
          7Conflusion
          Xanyproposals for unnesting SQL queries have been published in the past. `owever,
          so fartheir implementations fell short of comprehensively coverall possible patterns ±
          as becomes evident by surveying the existing wevenrecent) literature on optimizing spe-
          cial cases. Also, our analyis of commercial and open source database systems revealed
          that their optimizations only coverspecial patterns that warguably) are the most important
          use cases for query nesting. In this paper we have developed an algebraic transforma-
          tion approach that covers all kinds of nested subqueries. The algebraic equivalences allow
          to completely replace the initially used dependent joins by “regular” join operators. In
          order to decrease the extent of the nested query evaluation work, side-ways information
          passing is employed that restricts the independent subquery evaluation plan to those tu-
          ple sets that are relevant for the outer query.The approach is fully implemented in our
          main-memorydatabasesystem`yPerandcanbeexperimentedwithviaourwebinterface
          wwwFhypmr3dbFdmthat not only displays the running times of interactive queries but
          also showstheoptimizedqueryevaluationplans. `avingintegratedtheunnestingtransfor-
          mations into our cost-based optimizer ensures that we are nevertoo eager in, for example,
          decoupling the inner query from the outer query and thereby incurring higher costs ±the
          optimizer will do so only if there is acost beneﬁt which in manypractically relevant cases
          is dramatic.
          Afknowledgements
          This work wassupported by the German Research Foundation DFG. We acknowldge the
          helpful comments of the anonymous BTW-reviewers that helped to improve the paper.
          Referenfes
                                                   ¨
          [AB03]    Xichael O. Akinde and Xichael `. Bohlen. Efﬁcient Computation of Subqueries in
                    ComplexOLAP. In Umeshwar Dayal, Krithi Ramamritham, and T. X. Vijayaraman,
                    editors, Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Data Engineering,March
                    5-8, 2003, Bangalore, India,pages 1l3±174. IEEE Computer Society,2003.
               +                                                                        ¨
          [BAW 09] SrikanthBellamkonda,RaﬁAhmed,AndrewWitkowski,AngelaAmor,XohamedZaıt,
                    andChunChiehLin. EnhancedSubqueryOptimizationsinOracle. PVLDB,2w2):13ll±
                    1377, 2009.
          [BXX07] XatthiasBrantner,NormanXay,andGuidoXoerkotte. UnnestingScalarSQLQueries
                    in the Presence of Disjunction. In Proceedings of the 23rdInternational Conference on
                    Data Engineering,ICDE 2007, The MarmaraHotel, Istanbul, Turkey,Bpril 15-20,
                    2007,pages 4l±55, 2007.
          [CB05]    Bin Cao and Antonio Badia. ANested Relational Approach to Processing SQL Sub-
                                   ¨
                    queries. In Fatma Ozcan, editor, Proceedings of the BCMSIGMOD International Con-
                                                >GG
                   ference on Management of Data, Baltimore, Maryland, USB, June 14-16, 2005,pages
                   191±202. ACX, 2005.
         [CX93]    Sophie Cluet and Guido Xoerkotte. Nested Queries in Object Bases. In Catriel Beeri,
                   AtsushiOhori,andDennisShasha,editors,DatabaseProgrammingLanguages(DBPL-
                   4), Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop on Database Programming Lan-
                   guages-Object Models and Languages, Manhattan, NewYork City,USB, 30 Bugust -
                   1September 1993,Workshops in Computing, pages 22l±242. Springer,1993.
                                    ¨
         [CZ97]    Pedro Celis and `ansjorgZeller.Subquery Elimination: AComplete Unnesting Algo-
                                                                     ˚
                   rithm for an Extended Relational Algebra. In W. A. Gray and Per-AkeLarson, editors,
                   Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Data Engineering,Bpril
                   7-11, 1997 Birmingham U.K.,page 321. IEEE Computer Society,1997.
         [Day87]   Umeshwar Dayal. Of Nests and Trees: AUniﬁed Approach to Processing Queries
                   That Contain Nested Subqueries, Aggregates, and Quantiﬁers. In Peter X. Stocker,
                   William Kent, and Peter `ammersley, editors, VLDB’87, Proceedings of 13th Interna-
                   tional Conference on Very Large Data Bases, September 1-4, 1987, Brighton, England,
                   pages 197±208. XorganKaufmann, 1987.
         [Erl12]   Orri Erling. Virtuoso, a`ybrid RDBXS/Graph Column Store. IEEE Data Eng.Bull.,
                   35w1):3±8, 2012.
         [Erl14]   Orri Erling. personal communication, 2014.
                    ´
         [GJ01]    Cesar A. Galindo-Legaria and Xilind Joshi. Orthogonal Optimization of Subqueries
                   and Aggregation. In Sharad Xehrotra and Timos K. Sellis, editors, Proceedings of the
                   2001BCMSIGMODinternationalconferenceonManagementofdata,SantaBarbara,
                   CB,USB,May21-24,2001,pages571±581.ACX,2001.
                    ´
         [GR97]    Cesar A. Galindo-Legaria and Arnon Rosenthal. Outerjoin Simpliﬁcation and Reorder-
                   ing for Query Optimization. BCMTrans. Database Syst.,22w1):43±73, 1997.
                                                                            ¨
         [Gra03]   Goetz Graefe. Executing Nested Queries. In Gerhard Weikum, `arald Schoning, and
                   Erhard Rahm, editors, BTW 2003, Datenbanksysteme fur Business, Technologie und
                                                             ¨
                   Web, Tagungsband der 10. BTW-Konferenz, 26.-28. Februar 2003, Leipzig,volume 2l
                   of LNI,pages 58±77. GI, 2003.
                                   ¨
         [JK84]    Xatthias Jarkeand Jurgen Koch. Query Optimization in Database Systems. BCM
                   Comput. Surv.,1lw2):111±152, 1984.
         [Kie85]   Werner Kießling. On Semantic Reefs and Efﬁcient Processing of Correlation Queries
                   with Aggregates. In Alain Pirotte and Yannis Vassiliou, editors, VLDB’85, Proceed-
                   ings of 11th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases, Bugust 21-23, 1985,
                   Stockholm, Sweden.,pages 241±250. XorganKaufmann, 1985.
         [Kim82]   WonKim. On Optimizing an SQL-likeNested Query. BCMTrans. Database Syst.,
                   7w3):443±4l9, 1982.
         [KXPS94] AlfonsKemper,GuidoXoerkotte,KlausPeithner,andXichaelSteinbrunn. Optimizing
                   Disjunctive Queries with Expensive Predicates. In Richard T. Snodgrass and Xarianne
                   Winslett, editors, Proceedings of the 1994 BCMSIGMOD International Conference
                   on Management of Data, Minneapolis, Minnesota, May 24-27, 1994.,pages 33l±347.
                   ACXPress,1994.
                                             >GD
          [KN11]    Alfons Kemper and Thomas Neumann. `yPer: Ahybrid OLTP&OLAP main mem-
                    ory database system based on virtual memory snapshots. In Serge Abiteboul, Klemens
                     ¨
                    Bohm, Christoph Koch, and Kian-Lee Tan, editors, Proceedings of the 27th Interna-
                    tional Conference on Data Engineering,ICDE 2011, Bpril 11-16, 2011, Hannover,
                    Germany,pages 195±20l. IEEE Computer Society,2011.
          [LBKN14] Viktor Leis, Peter A. Boncz, Alfons Kemper,and Thomas Neumann. Xorsel-driven
                    parallelism: aNUXA-aware query evaluation framework for the many-core age. In
                                                       ¨
                    Curtis E. Dyreson, Feifei Li, and X. Tamer Ozsu, editors, International Conference on
                    Management of Data, SIGMOD 2014, Snowbird, UT,USB, June 22-27, 2014,pages
                    743±754. ACX, 2014.
          [SAB94]   `ennie J. Steenhagen, Peter X. G. Apers, and `enk X. Blanken. Optimization of
                    Nested Queries in aComplexObject Xodel. In Xatthias Jarke, Janis A. BubenkoJr.,
                    and Keith G. Jeffery,editors, Bdvances in Database Technology -EDBT’94. 4th Inter-
                    national Conference on Extending Database Technology,Cambridge, United Kingdom,
                    March 28-31, 1994, Proceedings,volume 779 of LectureNotes in Computer Science,
                    pages 337±350. Springer,1994.
          [S`P+9l] PraveenSeshadri,JosephX.`ellerstein,`amidPirahesh,T. Y. CliffLeung,RaghuRa-
                    makrishnan, Divesh Srivastava,Peter J. Stuckey,and S. Sudarshan. Cost-Based Opti-
                    mization for Xagic: Algebra and Implementation. In `. V. Jagadish and Inderpal Singh
                    Xumick,editors, Proceedings of the 1996 BCMSIGMOD International Conference on
                    Management of Data, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, June 4-6, 1996.,pages 435±44l.
                    ACXPress,199l.
          [SPL9l]   Praveen Seshadri, `amid Pirahesh, and T. Y. CliffLeung. ComplexQuery Decorre-
                    lation. In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on Data Engineering,
                    February 26 -March 1, 1996, NewOrleans, Louisiana,pages 450±458, 199l.
          [WXS99] Quan Wang, David Xaier,and Leonard Shapiro.  Algebraic unnesting for nested
                    queries. Technical report, Oregon `ealth &Science University,CSETech. Paper 252,
                    1999. http://digitalcommons.ohsu.edu/csetech/252.
                                               >G9
