                                                           Improving Unnesting of Complex Queries
                                                          ThomasNeumann 1
                                                          Abstract: SQL allows for very Е•exible nesting of queries, including subqueries that access attributes
                                                           by the outer part of the query. These correlated subqueries simplify query formulation, but their
                                                           execution is very inefficient, leading to н өнұӮ(н өнұӣ2) runtime complexity. Which can become prohibitively
                                                           expensive for large databases.
                                                           Queryoptimizers therefore try to unnest, i.e., decorrelate, dependent queries. Existing decorrelation
                                                           techniques, however, are either limited in scope or lead to suboptimal execution plans when correlated
                                                           queries are stacked repeatedly inside each other. In this work, we present a generalized unnesting
                                                           approach that can handle deep nestings of correlated subqueries and that generalizes to complex query
                                                           constructs, including recursive SQL. This generalized unnesting improves the asymptotic complexity,
                                                           and thus can lead to dramatic performance improvements in the affected queries.
                                                           Keywords: query optimization, query unnesting
                                                           1       Introduction
                                                           Oneofthekeyproperties of SQL is that it is a declarative query language, where the user
                                                           speciЕ‘es only the query intent and the database system then Е‘nds the best execution strategy
                                                           for this query. At least, that is the promise of it being declarative. In reality, this declarative
                                                           nature sometimes breaks down when formulating complex queries, in particular when the
                                                           queries contain complex subqueries.
                                                                                                                                                                                    н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ>5
                                                                                                                                                 н өнјҺ                                             О“
                                                                 SELECT *                                                                           c.mkt=AUTOMOBILE                               вҲ…;н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ:count(*)
                                                                 FROM customer
                                                                 WHERE c_mktsegment='AUTOMOBILE' AND                                                    customer c
                                                                     (SELECT COUNT(*)                                                                                                                  н өнұЎ >300000
                                                                       FROM orders
                                                                       WHERE o_custkey=c_custkey AND                                                                                    н өнјҺ                 О“
                                                                           (SELECT SUM(l_extendedprice)                                                                                    н өнұң.н өнұҗн өнұҳ=н өнұҗ.н өнұҗн өнұҳ    вҲ…;н өнұЎ:sum(н өнұҷ.н өнұ’н өнұқ)
                                                                            FROM lineitem
                                                                            WHERE l_orderkey=o_orderkey)>300000)>5                                                                                           н өнјҺ
                                                                                                                                                                                          orders o             н өнұҷ.н өнұңн өнұҳ=н өнұң.н өнұңн өнұҳ
                                                                                                                                                                                                             lineitem l
                                                                Fig. 1: Example Query with Nested Correlated Subqueries, the Correlations are Color Coded
                                                           Consider the example query in Figure 1. While conceptually simple Еӣ it Е‘nds customers
                                                           from the automobile market that have more than 5 orders with a revenue of more than 300K
                                                          Еӣ it is very unpleasant for most database systems. The canonical translation of this query
                                                           1   Technische UniversitГӨt MГјnchen, Institut fГјr Informatik, Boltzmannstr. 3, 85748 Garching, Germany,
                                                               neumann@in.tum.de,                    https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5787-142X
                               into relational algebra shown on the right uses a dependent join (  ), where the right-hand
                               side of the join is evaluated for every tuple of the left-hand side. This nested loop evaluation
                               is necessary because the right-hand side accesses values provided from the left-hand side,
                               which would not be possible if we were to use, e.g., a regular hash join. But algorithmically
                               a dependent join is a very bad idea, the runtime complexity of a join н өн°ҝ  н өнұ… is in Оҳ(|н өн°ҝ||н өнұ…|),
                               which grows quadratically with the input sizes. And for database engines execution times in
                               н өнұӮ(н өнұӣ2) are often prohibitive, as our н өнұӣ tends to be in the order of millions. On TPC-H scale
                               factor 1, this query needs over 25 minutes on PostgreSQL 16, even though it processes just 1
                               GBofdata.Notethat it is possible to reformulate the query in a way such that PostgreSQL
                               can answer it instantly, by decoupling the subqueries, but that makes the query longer and
                               more difficult to write. And given that SQL aims to be declarative, that transformation
                               should be done by the DBMS automatically.
                               Historically, database systems tried to cope with correlated subqueries by recognizing
                               commonpatterns in SQL queries and rewriting them to eliminate correlations [Ki82, JK84,
                               Ki85]. While this allows for an efficient execution of some correlated subquery patterns,
                               this is not a very satisfying approach, as even small changes to the SQL text can break these
                               patterns, again resulting in disastrous execution times. A fundamentally different approach
                               wasproposed in our previous work ten years ago [NK15]: It operates on the algebra level,
                               makingit robust against SQL variations, and it is based upon two observations: 1) we can
                               always rewrite a dependent join into a dependent join where the right-hand side is joined
                               with the unique correlation values from the left-hand side, and 2) a dependent join where
                               the left-hand side is duplicate free can be pushed down an algebra tree until the right-hand
                               side no longer depends on the left-hand side. We will discuss the approach in more detail in
                               Section 2.
                               Conceptually, this algorithm allows for eliminating correlations in arbitrary queries, dra-
                               matically improving the performance of these queries and making it possible to execute
                               them even for large inputs. It was such a signiЕ‘cant improvement that several database
                               systems now use it for unnesting queries. Both Hyper and DuckDB use it in commercial
                               offerings, our research system Umbra uses it, and we are aware of several other systems that
                               have prototype implementations. This more widespread usage exposed some limitations of
                               the original publication [NK15]: First, there are some advanced SQL constructs that are
                               not covered by the algorithm, particularly recursive SQL and complex order by and group
                               by constructs. And second, the algorithm sometimes exhibits pathological behavior when
                               dependent queries are nested inside each other, similar to what happens in our query in
                               Figure 1: The unnesting algorithm has to be executed twice Еӣ once for each dependent join.
                               Theoriginalalgorithmdoesthatbottom-up.Butbecausetheyarestackedinsideoneanother,
                               the second unnesting pass increases the costs of the Е‘rst join, leading to a performance
                               degradation that becomes worse the deeper the nesting is. See Section 2.3 for a detailed
                               example.
                               In this paper, we address both shortcomings. First, we change the algorithm to use a top-
                               downstrategy that takes subsequent dependent joins into account, leading to dramatically
                                                     better performance in the case of deep nestings. And second, we cover the remaining SQL
                                                     constructs, in particular recursive SQL and ORDER BY LIMIT constructs.
                                                    Therestofthispaperisstructured as follows: We give an overview of the problem statement
                                                     and discuss the original algorithm from [NK15] in Section 2. We then develop a new
                                                     algorithm that improves the previous approach in Section 3. Complex SQL constructs are
                                                     handled in Section 4. An evaluation is included in Section 5. Related work is discussed in
                                                     Section 6 and the results are summarized in Section 7.
                                                     2      Background
                                                     In the following section we will Е‘rst discuss the problem statement and an algebraic
                                                     representation of correlated subqueries. Then we will brieЕ•y repeat the unnesting algorithm
                                                     from [NK15], and we will show the limitations of that approach.
                                                     2.1      ProblemStatement
                                                     Internally, most database systems represent queries in relational algebra. Which means that
                                                    weneedanalgebraic representation for correlated subqueries. For that purpose, we use the
                                                     dependent join, a variant of a regular join. Both are deЕ‘ned below:
                                                                                        н өн°ҝ     н өнұқ н өнұ…    :=       {н өнұҷ в—Ұ н өнұҹ|н өнұҷ вҲҲ н өн°ҝ вҲ§ н өнұҹ вҲҲ н өнұ… вҲ§ н өнұқ(н өнұҷ в—Ұ н өнұҹ)}
                                                                                        н өн°ҝ     н өнұқ н өнұ…    :=       {н өнұҷ в—Ұ н өнұҹ|н өнұҷ вҲҲ н өн°ҝ вҲ§ н өнұҹ вҲҲ н өнұ…(н өнұҷ) вҲ§ н өнұқ(н өнұҷ в—Ұ н өнұҹ)}
                                                    That is, the dependent join makes the left-hand side of the join visible on the right-hand
                                                     side. Note that the usage of a dependent join is not optional in the presence of correlation.
                                                     If we wrote, e.g., н өн°ҝ                  (н өнјҺ               (н өнұ…)) we would get a type error, as н өн°ҝ.н өнұҘ is undeЕ‘ned in
                                                                                                 н өн°ҝ.н өнұҘ<н өнұ….н өнұҰ
                                                     the expression н өнјҺ                         (н өнұ…). If we use a dependent join like this н өн°ҝ                                  (н өнјҺ               (н өнұ…)), н өн°ҝ.н өнұҘ
                                                                                  н өн°ҝ.н өнұҘ<н өнұ….н өнұҰ                                                                                      н өн°ҝ.н өнұҘ<н өнұ….н өнұҰ
                                                     becomes bound and is therefore available. Note that dependent joins exist for all variants of
                                                     joins, i.e. left semi join ( ), left outer join (                              ) etc. have the corresponding dependent left
                                                     semi join ( ), dependent left outer join (                             ) etc. In all of these variants the right-hand side is
                                                     evaluated for every tuple from the left-hand side.
                                                    To simplify this reasoning about available and required attributes we introduce a bit of
                                                     notation. If н өнұҮ is an expression in relational algebra, A(н өнұҮ) is the set of attributes produced
                                                     by that expression. In our example, A(н өнұ…) would include н өнұ….н өнұҰ. If an attribute is used that
                                                     is not provided by its input (or a higher-up dependent join) it becomes a free variable, we
                                                     denote that as F (н өнұҮ). In our example, F (н өнұ…) = вҲ… and F (н өнјҺ                                                       (н өнұ…)) = {н өн°ҝ.н өнұҘ}. Note that
                                                                                                                                                          н өн°ҝ.н өнұҘ<н өнұ….н өнұҰ
                                                     it is not possible to evaluate an algebra expression if F (н өнұҮ) is not empty, all values have to
                                            be bound Е‘rst. This can be done either by placing a dependent join on top that provides
                                            these attributes or by changing the expression to remove the free variables.
                                            In the canonical translation of SQL into relational algebra, each subquery is added to the
                                            outer query via a dependent join (in the case of scalar subqueries via a dependent single
                                            join [NLK17]). This makes the attributes of the outer query available to the inner query.
                                            However, this comes at a high cost, the quadratic runtime of dependent joins. Thus, the
                                            problem of query unnesting can be formulated as follows:
                                           Problem Statement: Given a query in relational algebra, including dependent joins. Rewrite
                                            the query into an equivalent algebra expression that does not use dependent joins.
                                            Note that we can trivially replace a dependent join with a regular join if the right-hand side
                                            does not depend on the left-hand side:
                                                                              н өн°ҝ    н өнұ…   вүЎ н өн°ҝ н өнұ…            if A(н өн°ҝ) вҲ© F (н өнұ…) = вҲ…
                                           Weusuallyassumethatalldependentjoinsarenon-trivial.Next,wewilldiscussabottom-up
                                            strategy that eliminates all remaining dependent joins.
                                            2.2     Bottom-UpUnnesting
                                           Thepaper[NK15]introduces an algorithm that does a bottom-up traversal of the algebra
                                            tree and eliminates all dependent joins that it encounters. It uses two strategies for that:
                                            First, some dependent joins just exist because of syntax constraints of SQL. For example,
                                            this query here
                                                 SELECT *                                                                    н өнұЎн өнұҹн өнұўн өнұ’
                                                 FROM R                                                                                 н өнјҺ
                                                 WHERE EXISTS(SELECT *                                        R                           н өнұ….н өнұҘ=н өнұҶ.н өнұҰ
                                                                  FROM S
                                                                  WHERE R.x=S.y)                                                             S
                                            gets translated into a dependent semi join, but it is easy to see that we can pull up the Е‘lter
                                            condition into the semi join like this: н өнұ… н өнұ….н өнұҘ=н өнұҶ.н өнұҰн өнұҶ, eliminating the dependency. The paper
                                            calls that simple unnesting and always tries it Е‘rst.
                                            If that is not sufficient to eliminate the dependent join, the approach uses the second strategy,
                                           which is more complex but can handle arbitrary queries. It is based on two observations:
                                            First, for correlated subqueries it is not really necessary to evaluate the inner query for every
                                            tuple of the outer query; it is sufficient to evaluate it once for every possible binding of the
                                            free variables. We can compute the domain of the free variables н өн°· and use that to drive the
                                            dependent join:
                                                                               н өн°ҝ    н өнұ…    вүЎ н өн°ҝ naturalн өн°·(н өн°·             н өнұ…)    where
                                                                                    н өн°·     :=    О A(н өн°ҝ)вҲ©F(н өнұ…)(н өн°ҝ)
                                           Thenotation natural н өн°· here means that we perform a natural join on the attributes of н өн°·,
                                           which occur on both sides of the join. That join is performed with IS semantics, i.e., NULL
                                            is considered a dedicated value, and two NULLs compare as equal.
                                            Rewriting the original dependent join into a regular join and a dependent join with the
                                            binding domain н өн°· has two advantages: First, we know that |н өн°·| вүӨ |н өн°ҝ|, which means that our
                                            query has potentially become cheaper because we execute the inner query less often. Even
                                            moreimportantly, н өн°· is duplicate free, which allows for push down rewrites that do not hold
                                            for arbitrary tables. The paper then lists a number of rules to push down the dependent join.
                                            Here are the most important ones:
                                                            н өн°·    (н өнјҺн өнұқ(н өнұҮ))      вҶ’ н өнјҺн өнұқ(н өн°· н өнұҮ)
                                                          н өн°·    (н өнұҮ       н өнұҮ )    вҶ’ (н өн°· н өнұҮ )               н өнұҮ      if F (н өнұҮ ) вҲ© A(н өн°·) = вҲ…
                                                                   1    н өнұқ  2                      1     н өнұқ  2              2
                                                          н өн°·    (н өнұҮ       н өнұҮ )    вҶ’ н өнұҮ            (н өн°·    н өнұҮ )      otherwise if F (н өнұҮ ) вҲ© A(н өн°·) = вҲ…
                                                                   1    н өнұқ  2              1    н өнұқ         2                               1
                                                          н өн°·    (н өнұҮ       н өнұҮ )    вҶ’ (н өн°· н өнұҮ )                          (н өн°·     н өнұҮ )     otherwise
                                                                   1    н өнұқ  2                      1     н өнұқвҲ§naturalн өн°·          2
                                                          н өн°·    (н өнұҮ       н өнұҮ )    вҶ’ (н өн°· н өнұҮ )                           (н өн°·    н өнұҮ )
                                                                   1    н өнұқ  2                      1     н өнұқвҲ§naturalн өн°·           2
                                                       н өн°·    (О“н өн°ҙ;н өнұҺн өнұ”н өнұ”(н өнұҮ))     вҶ’ О“н өн°ҙвҲӘA(н өн°·);н өнұҺн өнұ”н өнұ”(н өн°·             н өнұҮ)
                                           This process is repeated until the dependent join becomes trivial and can be replaced with a
                                            regular join. This must always happen because the dependent join is pushed down further
                                           with each transformation and the leaves of the algebra tree have no free variables.
                                           AsaЕ‘nalstep, the query optimizer can decide if it wants to remove the dependent join with
                                            н өн°·: If all attributes of н өн°· are bound in equality conditions, e.g., if н өн°· consists of the column
                                            н өнұҘ and the query contains the Е‘lter condition н өнұҘ = н өнұҰ, the join with н өн°· can be removed and
                                            replaced with н өнј’н өнұҘ:н өнұҰ instead, such that the column н өнұҘ is computed by the value н өнұҰ. This works
                                            because н өн°· was duplicate free, thus we know that the dependent join will Е‘nd at most one
                                            join partner, and because our original dependent join was transformed into                                     natural D, and
                                            thus the join condition will be enforced at that point of the plan. Conceptually this results in
                                            the most elegant plans, as now н өн°· is completely gone and the resulting algebra expression
                                            looks like any regular query, but performance-wise it might be a bad idea to do so. If the join
                                           with н өн°· was selective it might be better to keep the join with н өн°·, as it removes tuples earlier.
                                            But regardless of whether or not the query optimizer decides to perform the Е‘nal trans-
                                            formation step, the result will be a completely unnested plan without any dependent joins.
                                           While that sounds perfect, we will discuss limitations of that approach next.
                                                    2.3       Limitations of the Bottom-Up Approach
                                                    While the bottom-up approach handles most queries just Е‘ne, it unfortunately degenerates
                                                    in some corner cases. We were originally notiЕ‘ed about this by Sam Arch, who translated
                                                    complex UDFs into pure SQL [Fr24]. There, similar to our original example in Figure 1, it
                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                    could happen that dependent subqueries are nested inside each other. We show a variation
                                                    below.
                                                                                                                         н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ>5
                                                                                                   н өнјҺн өнұ“ = 123                          О“вҲ…;н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ:...
                                                                                                       н өнұҮ                                    н өнұЎ >...
                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                             н өнјҺ                    О“
                                                                                                                               н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ
                                                                                                                                 2       1           вҲ…;н өнұЎ:...
                                                                                                                                              н өнјҺ
                                                                                                                                                 н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҸвҲ§
                                                                                                                                   н өнұҮ              3       2
                                                                                                                                     2           н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ
                                                                                                                                                   3       1
                                                                                                                                                      н өнұҮ
                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                    TheunnestingalgorithmwillЕ‘rstunnestthelowerdependentjoin,resultinginthefollowing
                                                    plan:
                                                                                                                         н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ>5
                                                                                                  н өнјҺн өнұ“ = 123                           О“вҲ…;н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ:...
                                                                                                       н өнұҮ                        н өнұЎ >...вҲ§ natural {н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ}
                                                                                                         1                                              2
                                                                                                                                              О“{н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ};н өнұЎ:...
                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                              н өнјҺ
                                                                                                                                                 н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ
                                                                                                                                                   3       1
                                                                                                                                                  н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ
                                                                                                                                                   3       2
                                                                                                                                         О                     н өнұҮ
                                                                                                                                            н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ              3
                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                            н өнјҺ
                                                                                                                               н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ
                                                                                                                                2       1
                                                                                                                                  н өнұҮ
                                                                                                                                     2
                                                    Theoptimizer would probably decide to keep the computation of О                                                               (н өнјҺ                (н өнұҮ )) Еӣ
                                                                                                                                                                           н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ     н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ     2
                                                                                                                                                                            2          2       1
                                                    instead of using substitution Еӣ because the Е‘lter condition н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ = н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ would be selective.
                                                                                                                                                            2            1
                                                    2    Note that we added a new correlation condition, н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ = н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ, to trigger the problem in a small example.
                                                                                                                              3          1
                               But if we now run the algorithm again, to eliminate the topmost dependent join, we
                               conceptually evaluate the right-hand side of the lower join for the full cross product of the
                               domains ofн өнұҮ .н өнұҺ and н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ, and not for the domain of the join of these two tables:
                                             1        2
                                                               н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ>5вҲ§ natural {н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ}
                                                                             1
                                                                           О“{н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ};н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ:...
                                                                               1
                                                                        н өнұЎ >...вҲ§ natural {н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ,н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ}
                                                                                     1    2
                                                                                О“{н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ,н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ};н өнұЎ:...
                                                                                   1   2
                                                                                    н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ
                                                                                     3    1
                                                                               О           н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ
                                                                                 н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ    3   2
                                                                                  1
                                                                                    О             н өнұҮ
                                                                                      н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ      3
                                                                                       2
                                                                         н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ
                                                                          2    1
                                                                    О            н өнұҮ
                                                                      н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ      2
                                                                       1
                                                        н өнјҺн өнұ“ = 123
                                                          н өнұҮ
                                                            1
                               Note that the result is still correct, because the join condition of   н өнұЎ >...вҲ§ natural {н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ,н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ}
                                                                                                                    1   2
                               eliminates all н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ values from the cross product that do not satisfy the join condition of
                                               1
                                    н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ, but the group by operator processes far too many values.
                                     2    1
                               This problem becomes worse and worse the deeper the nesting is. Sam Arch had sent us a
                               query Еӣ tellingly called crash.sql Еӣ that contained six nested joins and where the unnesting
                               strategy created large intermediate cross products which would all then vanish after Е‘ltering
                               of subsequent operators, but which consumed memory and CPU time regardless. This
                               motivated us to develop a holistic unnesting strategy that considered all dependent joins
                               simultaneously, thus avoiding the unnecessary cross products. We will discuss that new
                               algorithm next.
                               3    Holistic Query Unnesting
                               In this section, we introduce a holistic unnesting algorithm that processes nested dependent
                               joins together in one pass. It can be seen as a top-down variant of [NK15], as it uses the
                               sameidea of pushing down the domain н өн°· of the free variable bindings. But we formulate
                               it differently: instead of explicitly pushing down н өн°·      through the tree, the algorithm
                                                    remembers which н өн°· would have to be added, and rewrites all operators in a top-down pass
                                                    until н өн°· becomes unnecessary or can be added safely.
                                                    Wesplitthealgorithmintothreeparts:First,apreparatoryphasethatidentiЕ‘esallnon-trivial
                                                    dependentjoinsandannotatesthemwithinformationthatthemainalgorithmneeds.Second,
                                                    the logic to eliminate dependent joins, which will be called for all non-trivial dependent
                                                    joins in top-to-bottom order and which is the main algorithm, and third, the unnesting rules
                                                    for individual operators. Note that we do not include a formalization of this approach due to
                                                    space constraints, formal deЕ‘nitions and a proof of correctness can be found in a technical
                                                    report [Ne24].
                                                    3.1       Identifying Non-Trivial Dependent Joins
                                                    First, we have to identify all non-trivial dependent joins, i.e., dependent joins where the
                                                    right-hand side accesses attributes provided by the left hand side. The easiest way to achieve
                                                    this is to use an indexed algebra [FMN23], where we can query the structure of the algebra
                                                    expressions. If this functionality is available, we consider every column access and compute
                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                    the lowest common ancestor (LCA) of the operator в—Ұ that accesses the column and the
                                                    operatorв—Ұ2 thatprovidesthecolumn.IftheLCAisnotв—Ұ1,itmustbeadependentjoin                                                                           3 and
                                                                             3                                  1                                                               3
                                                    weannotate                  with the fact that в—Ұ is accessing the left-hand side of                                          . The annotations
                                                    for the example query from the previous section are shown in Figure 2. Dependent joins
                                                    that have no accessing operators are trivial and can simply be converted into regular joins.
                                                                                   1
                                                                                   н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ>5
                                                                2                                   4                                     accessing(          1) := {н өнјҺ6, н өнјҺ9}
                                                             н өнјҺн өнұ“ = 123                          О“вҲ…;н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ:...                            accessing(          5) := {н өнјҺ9}
                                                                 н өнұҮ3                                  5
                                                                   1                                  н өнұЎ >...
                                                                                       н өнјҺ6                  О“8
                                                                                         н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ        вҲ…;н өнұЎ:...
                                                                                           2      1
                                                                                               7        н өнјҺ9
                                                                                            н өнұҮ             н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҸвҲ§
                                                                                              2             3       2
                                                                                                           н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ
                                                                                                            3       1
                                                                                                              н өнұҮ10
                                                                                                                3
                                                                                               Fig. 2: Annotations For Our Example Query
                                                    Using an indexed algebra is ideal for this phase because it can do every LCA computation
                                                    in н өнұӮ(logн өнұӣ) without any additional data structures. If the DBMS does not support that
                                                    functionality, the same information can be computed with worse asymptotic complexity by
                                                    keeping track of the column sets that are available in the different parts of the tree.
                                 3.2   Eliminating Dependent Joins
                                 After identifying all non-trivial dependent joins, we process them in a top-to-bottom order,
                                 eliminating each of them. If a dependent join is nested within another dependent join, it
                                 will usually be eliminated while the ancestor join is eliminated. That is not always the case
                                 because, as we will see below, eliminating the ancestor join might stop before reaching the
                                 descendant join. But we never push different н өн°· sets across dependent joins, thus eliminating
                                 the problem discussed in Section 2.3.
                                  1 fun simpleDJoinElimination(join):
                                  2     for op in accessing(join):
                                  3        if path from op to join is linear:
                                  4           if op is a selection and can merge op into join:
                                  5              merge op into join
                                  6              remove op from accessing(join)
                                  7           else if op is a map and can move op above join:
                                  8              move op above join
                                  9              remove op from accessing(join)
                                 10     if accessing(join) is empty:
                                 11        convert join into regular join
                                 12     return whether or not we converted the join
                                                         Fig. 3: Simple Dependent Joins Elimination Join
                                 In our running example, we would start with          1 then Е‘rst try a simple dependent join
                                 elimination. This is a generalization of the simple unnesting from [NK15] and shown in
                                 Figure 3: We inspect all operators op that are accessing the left-hand side of the the join,
                                 and we check if the path from that operator to the join consists of only linear operators
                                 (i.e., operators that allow for partitioning their input, see [G.20]). That can be checked in
                                 н өнұӮ(logн өнұӣ) with an indexed algebra, or with a linear traversal from op to join otherwise. If yes,
                                 wecanmoveopuptowardsthejoin.Ifopisaselection,wedothatifpermitted,mergingthe
                                 selection with the join and thus eliminating the accessing operator. For maps (sometimes
                                 also called projections), we cannot simply drop the map, but we can check if we could move
                                 the map above the join. If that is possible, we do that, again eliminating the operator from
                                 the list of accessing operators. If afterwards no accessing operator is left, we can simply
                                 convert the dependent join into a regular join. That step would be sufficient for the EXISTS
                                 query from Section 2.2, but in our running example none of the dependent joins can be
                                 eliminated like that.
                                  1 struct UnnestingInfo:
                                  2     join : join operator of the form н өн°ҝ  н өнұ…
                                  3     outerRefs : A(н өн°ҝ) вҲ© F(н өнұ…)
                                  4     D : domain computation, О         (н өн°ҝ)
                                                                  outerRefs
                                  5     parent : parent Unnesting struct (if any)
                                  6 struct Unnesting:
                                  7     info : the UnnestingInfo shared between Unnesting states
                                  8     cclasses : union find data structure of equivalent columns
                                  9     repr : mapping from outerRefs columns to new colunns (if any)
                                                            Fig. 4: State Maintained During Unnesting
                               If simple unnesting is not sufficient, the full unnesting algorithm is started. It has to rewrite
                               the right-hand side of the dependent join such that no references from the outer side occur
                               anymore. To do that it maintains some state, as shown in Figure 4. The state is split into the
                               part that remains the same the whole time (UnnestingInfo) and the part that changes in the
                               different parts of the query (Unnesting). In the global part, it stores the join itself and the
                               set of outer references. That is, the columns from the left that are accessed from the right,
                               and the corresponding domain computation D. The parent entry allows for recognizing
                               nested dependent joins within the algorithm. In the query fragment local part, it maintains a
                               union-Е‘nd data structure cclasses to keep track of equivalent columns. We use that for
                               transitive reasoning. If the query has predicates of the form н өнұҺ = н өнұҸ and н өнұҸ = н өнұҗ, and we have an
                               outer reference to н өнұҗ, we could substitute that with н өнұҺ if н өнұҺ is available. If we have substituted
                               an outer reference with something else we store that in repr, which allows us to look up the
                               newnameofanouterreference.
                               The algorithm will substitute outer references with other columns, thus it is convenient
                               to have a helper function that rewrites all column references that occur in an operator, as
                               shownbelow, that will be called after the suitable replacements have been found:
                                1 fun rewriteColumns(op, unnesting):
                                2     for each column reference c in op:
                                3        if unnesting.repr contains c:
                                4          replace c with unnesting.repr[c]
                                               Fig. 5: Helper Function To Rewrite References to Outer Columns
                               With that infrastructure we can now describe the real elimination algorithm. It will be
                               called for each dependent join, ordered from root to bottom, and can optionally be passed a
                               parent Unnesting structure if we encounter another dependent join during our unnesting (see
                               Section 3.3). It will Е‘rst check if simple unnesting is sufficient. If yes it will stop, otherwise,
                               it will unnest the left-hand side in the case of nested dependent joins. Then, it creates a
                               new Unnesting structure, merges it with the parent unnesting if needed, and unnests the
                               right-hand side. The pseudo code for that step is shown in Figure 6.
                               Wewillillustrate that algorithm with one full unnesting run next. For our running example,
                               the algorithm starts with   1, and then initializes the state as follows:
                  1 fun dJoinElimination(join, parentUnnesting, parentAccessing):
                  2  // Check if simple unnesting is sufficient
                  3  if simpleDJoinElimination(join):
                  4   // Handle the outer unnesting if needed
                  5   if parentUnnesting is set:
                  6     for each map m moved by simpleDJoinElimination:
                  7      rewriteColumns(m, parentUnnesting)
                  8     unnest(join, parentUnnesting, parentAccessing)
                  9   return
                 11  // In the nested case we have to unnest the left-hand side first
                 12  if parentUnnesting is set:
                 13   accLeft = вҲ…
                 14   for a in parentAccessing:
                 15     if a is contained in join.left:
                 16       insert a into accLeft
                 17   unnest(join.left, parentUnnesting, accLeft)
                 18   // Update our condition as needed
                 19   rewriteColumns(join.condition.parentUnnestring)
                 20   for each map m moved by simpleDJoinElimination:
                 21     rewriteColumns(m, parentUnnesting)
                 23  // Create a new unnesting struct
                 24  info = new UnnestingInfo for join, set parent=parentUnnesting
                 25  unnest = new Unnesting for info
                 27  // Merge with parent unnesting if needed
                 28  acc = accessing(join)
                 29  if parentUnnesting is set:
                 30   for each a in parentAccessing:
                 31     if a is contained in join.right:
                 32      insert a into acc
                 34  // Unnest right-hand side
                 35  add equivalences from join.condition to unnest.cclasses
                 36  unnest(join.right, info, acc)
                 38  for each c in info.outerRefs:
                 39   add "{c}вҗЈisвҗЈnotвҗЈdistinctвҗЈfromвҗЈ{info.repr[c]}" to join.condition
                            Fig. 6: The General Case of Dependent Join Elimination
                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                           н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ>5                                                                                                        outerRef:={н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                            н өнјҺ2                                                                        О“4                                                                                  cclasses:=вҲ…
                                                                                                                                   н өнұ“   =123                                                                 вҲ…;н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ:...                                                                  repr:=вҲ…
                                                                                                                                     н өнұҮ3                                                                           5                                                                                                                          4                  6            9
                                                                                                                                          1                                                                        н өнұЎ >...                                                                 next: unnest(О“ , {н өнјҺ ,н өнјҺ })
                                                                                                                                                                                  н өнјҺ6                                         О“8
                                                                                                                                                                                       н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ                               вҲ…;н өнұЎ:...
                                                                                                                                                                                           2               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                    7                н өнјҺ9
                                                                                                                                                                                              н өнұҮ                           н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҸвҲ§
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2                          3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  н өнұҮ10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                          Wewillcovertheexact rules for the unnest subroutines in Section 3.3, but intuitively we
                                                                                                           unnest the group by О“4 by recursively unnesting its input and then later adding the outer
                                                                                                           column references to the group by. Performing those steps leads to the following state:
                                                                                                                                                                           1                                                                                                               outerRef:={н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ}
                                                                                                                                                                           н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ>5                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                            н өнјҺ2                                                                        О“4                                                                                  cclasses:=вҲ…
                                                                                                                                   н өнұ“   =123                                                                 вҲ…;н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ:...                                                                  repr:=вҲ…
                                                                                                                                     н өнұҮ3                                                                           5                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                                          1                                                                        н өнұЎ >...                                                                 stack: [О“ ]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           next: unnest(                                        5, {н өнјҺ6, н өнјҺ9})
                                                                                                                                                                                  н өнјҺ6                                         О“8
                                                                                                                                                                                       н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ                               вҲ…;н өнұЎ:...
                                                                                                                                                                                           2               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                    7                н өнјҺ9
                                                                                                                                                                                              н өнұҮ                           н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҸвҲ§
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2                          3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  н өнұҮ10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                          Weencounteranother dependent join, one where simple elimination is not sufficient. We
                                                                                                          will merge the unnesting state with the outer dependent join later; for now, we unnest the
                                                                                                           left input:
                                                                                                                                                                           1                                                                                                               outerRef:={н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ}
                                                                                                                                                                           н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ>5                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                   2                                                                         4                                                                             cclasses:={{н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ,н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ}}
                                                                                                                            н өнјҺн өнұ“ = 123                                                                 О“вҲ…;н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ:...                                                                                                                       1                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           repr:=вҲ…
                                                                                                                                     н өнұҮ3                                                                           5                                                                                                      4              5
                                                                                                                                          1                                                                        н өнұЎ >...                                                                 stack: [О“ ,                                       ]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           next: unnest(н өнјҺ6, {н өнјҺ6})
                                                                                                                                                                                  н өнјҺ6                                         О“8
                                                                                                                                                                                       н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ                               вҲ…;н өнұЎ:...
                                                                                                                                                                                           2               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                    7                н өнјҺ9
                                                                                                                                                                                              н өнұҮ                           н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҸвҲ§
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2                          3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  н өнұҮ10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                          Whenunnestingtheselect, we add the equivalence condition implied by the select to the
                                                                                                           cclasses data structure, remove the select from the accessing list (the second function
                                                                                                           argument of unnest), and recurse to the input:
                                                                                                                                                                           1                                                                                                               outerRef:={н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ}
                                                                                                                                                                           н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ>5                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           cclasses:={{н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ,н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ}}
                                                                                                                            н өнјҺ2                                                                        О“4                                                                                                                                  1                  2
                                                                                                                                   н өнұ“   =123                                                                 вҲ…;н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ:...                                                                  repr:=вҲ…
                                                                                                                                     н өнұҮ3                                                                           5                                                                                                      4              5              6
                                                                                                                                          1                                                                        н өнұЎ >...                                                                 stack: [О“ ,                                       , н өнјҺ ]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           next: unnest(н өнұҮ7, {})
                                                                                                                                                                                  н өнјҺ6                                         О“8                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                       н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ                               вҲ…;н өнұЎ:...
                                                                                                                                                                                           2               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                    7                н өнјҺ9
                                                                                                                                                                                              н өнұҮ                           н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҸвҲ§
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2                          3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  н өнұҮ10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                          At this point the accessing list is empty and we have two choices: either we introduce a
                                                                                                           join with н өн°· := О                                                                    (н өнјҺ                         (н өнұҮ )) and use that to substitute н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ; or we exploit the fact
                                                                                                                                                                        н өнұҺ:=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ                       н өнұ“ =123                   1                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                           that all outer column references are bound in cclasses and we simply replace н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2                                   1
                                                                                                           the equivalent н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ. The optimal choice depends on the selectivity of н өнјҺ . For now we will
                                                                                                                                                                   2                   2
                                                                                                           simply assume that н өнјҺ is selective, and thus we introduce a join. Then we pop up the stack
                                                                                                           until we reach                                            5 again, rewriting columns along the way. Note that in this case, the rewrite
                                                                                                           does nothing because we decided to not substitute н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ with н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ. Our next unnest call is
                                                                                                                            8                                                                                                                                                                      1                                   2
                                                                                                           for О“ :
                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                           н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ>5
                                                                                                                                                                                                       О“4
                                                                                                                                                                                                             вҲ…;н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ:...                                                                  outerRef:={н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ,н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5                                                                       cclasses:=вҲ…
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   н өнұЎ >...                                                                 repr:=вҲ…
                                                                                                                                                                                  н өнјҺ6                                         О“8                                                                                          4              5
                                                                                                                                                                                       н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ                               вҲ…;н өнұЎ:...
                                                                                                                                                                                           2               1                                                                               stack: [О“ ,                                       ]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            9                                                              next: unnest(О“8, {н өнјҺ9})
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     н өнјҺ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҸвҲ§
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3                1
                                                                                                                                                                О н өнұҺвҖІ:=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ                                     н өнұҮ7              н өнұҮ10
                                                                                                                                                                                      1                               2                3
                                                                                                                            н өнјҺ2
                                                                                                                                   н өнұ“   =123
                                                                                                                                     н өнұҮ3
                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                          The other side is processed analogously, we recurse below the group by; then below the
                                                                                                           select; remove that н өнјҺ9 from the accessing list; and add its constraints to the equivalence
                                                                                                           classes. Then again we have to decide if we want to add a join or use substitution. To show
                                                                                                           both cases, we now assume that the optimizer decides to use substitution (even though that
                                                                                                           is unlikely for this query). Then, we add н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ вҶ’ н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ,н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ вҶ’ н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ to repr and rewrite all
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1                             3                  2                            3
                                                                                                           columns on the way up. This gives us the following unnested plan:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ>5вҲ§н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       О“4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            {н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ};н өнұҗн өнұӣн өнұЎ:...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        н өнұЎ >...вҲ§н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺвҲ§н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1               3                2               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  н өнјҺ6                                       О“8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ                             {н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ,н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ};н өнұЎ:...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2                1                           3              3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   н өнјҺ9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        н өнұҮ .н өнұҸ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҸвҲ§
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           О н өнұҺвҖІ:=н өнұҮ .н өнұҺ                                                 н өнұҮ7                     н өнұҮ10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1                                          2                       3
                                                                                                                                                                                                   н өнјҺ2
                                                                                                                                                                                                          н өнұ“   =123
                                                                                                                                                                                                            н өнұҮ3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                             3.3   Unnesting Rules
                             WenowbrieЕ•ydiscusstheunnesting rules for individual operators. These are analogous to
                             the push down rules from [NK15], thus we only give an overview over the most important
                             rules due to space constraints. All operators share the common logic that 1) if we call
                             unnest(в—Ұ, info, accessing) and accessing is empty, unnesting stops, and we either
                             replace в—Ұ with info.D  в—Ұorwesubstitute all outer references with equivalent columns from
                             info.cclasses, and 2) when recursing to an input of an operator в—Ұ, в—Ұ is removed from the
                             accessing list if needed. We do not list that code explicitly.
                             For selections, the unnesting logic registers the Е‘lter conditions and rewrites all columns on
                             the way back:
                               1 fun unnest(select, info, accessing):
                               2   add equivalences from select.predicate to info.cclasses
                               3   unnest(select.input, info, accessing)
                               4   rewriteColumns(select.condition, info)
                             Similar for maps, where we only have to rename columns after unnesting the input:
                               1 fun unnest(map, info, accessing):
                               2   unnest(map.input, info, accessing)
                               3   rewriteColumns(map.computations, info)
                             The group by operator unnests its input and adds the outer references to the group by
                             attributes. Note that there is a special case where the group by is static (i.e., a select
                             clause with aggregation functions but without group by). In that case, we must produce a
                             non-empty output for an empty input, and we provide that with an outer join (or a group
                             join [MN11] if supported by the system):
                               1 fun unnest(groupby, info, accessing):
                               2   static = groupby.groups is empty or groups.groupingsets contains вҲ…
                               3   unnest(groupby.input, info, accessing)
                               4   rewriteColumns(groupby, info)
                               5   for c in info.outerRefs:
                               6      add info.repr[c] to groupby.groups
                               7   if static:
                               8      replace groupby with info.D groupy, joining on mapped info.outerRefs
                             Windowoperators are conceptually handled similar to group by. We have to add the outer
                             references to the partition by clause in order to compute the window functions separately
                             for each binding:
                               1 fun unnest(window, info, accessing):
                               2   unnest(window.input, info, accessing)
                               3   rewriteColumns(window, info)
                               4   for c in info.outerRefs:
                               5      add info.repr[c] to window.partitionby
                             For joins, we check if we have encountered another dependent join, merging both removals
                             if needed. Otherwise, we check if all dependent accesses occur only on one side. If yes,
                             and if the join type does not have to keep track of the number of join partners, we can
                             simply recurse, like a selection. If not, we unnest both sides and update the join condition as
                             needed:
                               1 fun unnest(join, info, accessing):
                               2   split accessing into accessingLeft and accessingRight for input of join
                               4   // Check if we have encounter another dependent join
                               5   if accessing(join) is not empty:
                               6      dJoinElimination(join, info, accessing)
                               7      return
                               9   // Check if only one side accesses outer columns
                              10   if accessingRight is empty and info.join cannot output unmatched from the right:
                              11      unnest(join.left, info, accessingLeft)
                              12      rewriteColumns(join.condition, info)
                              13      return
                              14   if accessingLeft is empty and info.join cannot output unmatched from the left:
                              15      unnest(join.right, info, accessingRight)
                              16      rewriteColumns(join.condition, info)
                              17      return
                              19   // Unnest both sides
                              20   unnestingLeft = new Unnesting(info.info)
                              21   unnestingRight = new Unnesting(info.info)
                              22   unnest(join.left, unnestLeft, accessingLeft)
                              23   unnest(join.right, unnestRight, accessingRight)
                              24   rewriteColumnsForJoin(join.condition, unnestingLeft, unnestingRight)
                              25   for c in info.outerRefs:
                              26      add "{unnestLeft.repr[c]}вҗЈisвҗЈnotвҗЈdistinctвҗЈfromвҗЈ{unnestRight.repr[c]}" to join.condition
                              27   merge cclasses and repr from unnestLeft and unnestRight into info
                             Note that a different logic for rewriting columns is needed for joins, as we have to take
                             the join type into account to decide which side of the join to use for the replacement.
                             Aleft outer join, which outputs unmatched rows from the left, would use the left side
                             for the replacement, while a right outer join would use the right side. A full outer join
                             must determine the used side per row, by replacing the columns with expressions such as
                             COALESCE(unnestLeft.repr[c], unnestRight.repr[c]).
                             4    HandlingComplexSQLConstructs
                             Whilethepushdownrulesfrom[NK15]andSection3.3aresufficientformostqueries,there
                             are some complex SQL constructs that are not obvious to unnest, in particular, correlated
                             subqueries in full join conditions, WITH RECURSIVE, common-table expressions (CTEs), and
                             ORDER BY ... LIMIT. Most systems cannot unnest these constructs, and there has only been
                             little research on how to unnest recursion [FGL24]. We will look at these constructs next.
                             4.1   Unnesting Correlated Subqueries in Full Join Conditions
                             The SQL standard allows join conditions to access columns from both sides of the join.
                             The SQL standard also allows subqueries in arbitrary expressions. Thus, it is possible
                                             to write a query where the join condition contains a subquery that references attributes
                                             from the left and the right side of the join. If the join is a inner or left outer join, that
                                             subquery can be cross applied to the right input of the join, and the query can be unnested
                                             normally. Right outer joins can be handled by Е•ipping the sides. However, full outer joins
                                             are more complicated. The semantics of correlated full outer joins are not well-deЕ‘ned, as
                                             the deЕ‘nition for ЕӮunmatched tuplesЕҫ is not clear in the presence of dynamic inputs. Thus,
                                             wecannotjust generate a cross apply for the subquery and unnest the query normally. We
                                             instead use the following equivalence
                                                         н өнұ…          н өнұҶ вүЎ н өнұ…                             н өнұҶ                          н өнј’     вҖІ ((н өн°·       н өн°· )     н өнұҮ)
                                                               н өнұқ(н өнұҮ)             н өнұҡвҲ§(н өнұ….н өнұҘ is н өн°·н өнұ….н өнұҘ)       н өнұҡвҲ§(н өнұҶ.н өнұҰ is н өн°·н өнұҶ.н өнұҰ)    н өнұҡ:н өнұқ        н өнұ…      н өнұҶ
                                             whereн өнұҮ is a singleton subquery from within the join condition, н өнұқ is the join condition that
                                             references the results of the subquery, н өн°·н өнұ… and н өн°·н өнұҶ are the domains of н өнұ… and н өнұҶ projected
                                             to the free variables of н өнұқ and н өнұҮ (denoted as н өнұҘ and н өнұҰ, respectively), and н өнұқвҖІ is н өнұқ remapped
                                             to use columns from н өн°·н өнұ… and н өн°·н өнұҶ instead of н өнұ… and н өнұҶ. We will attempt to break down
                                             the equivalent tree bottom-up. Firstly, the subquery  н өнј’                                ((н өн°·       н өн°· )     н өнұҮ) computes the
                                                                                                                                н өнұҡ:н өнұқ      н өнұ…      н өнұҶ
                                             predicate for every possible binding of the outer references. Secondly, the left outer join
                                             with н өнұҶ on the result of the predicate (via н өнұҡ) ensures that the unmatched tuples from н өнұҶ are
                                             only produced once in total, while the matching tuples are produced for every binding of
                                             the outer references from н өнұ…. Finally, the full outer join with н өнұ… on the result of the predicate
                                             (via н өнұҡ) provides the Е‘nal result. Note that the inner subquery (н өн°·н өнұ… н өн°·н өнұҶ)                                       н өнұҮ needs to be
                                             further unnested.
                                             Instead of generating the subquery (н өн°·н өнұ… н өн°·н өнұҶ)                         н өнұҮ and unnesting it from scratch, we directly
                                             call unnest on the subquery н өнұҮ to accomplish the same effect. In this case, we use a slightly
                                             modiЕ‘edUnnestingInfo structure which ensures the domain D represents a cross product
                                             of н өн°·н өнұ… and н өн°·н өнұҶ and that the conditions of both joins are amended by the corresponding is
                                             not distinct from predicates.
                                             4.2      Unnesting WITHRECURSIVE
                                             WeassumethataWITH RECURSIVEconstructistranslatedintoaniterateoperator[Pa17]anda
                                             corresponding iteratescan (DuckDB calls these recursive_cte amd recursive_cte_scan),
                                             where the left hand side of the iterate computes the base table and the right hand side is
                                             evaluated until empty, reading the last iteration in iteratescan:
                                                                                                                       iterateн өнұҘвҖІвҖІ:=(н өнұ….н өнұҘ,н өнұӣ)
                                                   WITH RECURSIVE REC(x) AS (                                                                 н өнј’      вҖІ
                                                       SELECT x FROM R                                             R                            н өнұӣ:=н өнұҘ +1
                                                       UNION ALL
                                                       SELECT x+1 from REC WHERE x<5)                                                           н өнјҺ вҖІ
                                                   SELECT x FROM REC                                                                              н өнұҘ <5
                                                                                                                                       iteratescanн өнұҘвҖІ:=н өнұ….н өнұҘ
                             Whenunnesting this construct, we want to conceptually evaluate the iteration for every
                             possible binding of the outer references. We achieve this by adding the outer references
                             to the columns of the recursive CTE. But now we must make sure that the repeated part
                             is conceptually partitioned by the outer references, too. Thus, we add all iterationscan
                             operators of the current iteration to the accessing list. This makes sure that the unnesting
                             phase reaches these operators, adds the outer references to the scans, too, and rewrites all
                             intermediate operators along the way to take the outer references into account:
                               1 fun unnest(iteration, info, accessing):
                               2   // Mark iteration scans as accessing
                               3   split accessing into accessingLeft and accessingRight for input of iteration
                               4   for s in iterationscans of iteration:
                               5      add s to accessingRight
                               7   // Unnest the seed side first to make the new columns available
                               8   unnestingLeft = new Unnesting(info.info)
                               9   unnest(iteration.left, unnestLeft, accessingLeft)
                              10   rewriteColumns(iteration.leftColumns, unnestingLeft)
                              11   for c in info.outerRefs:
                              12      add unnestLeft.repr[c] to iteration.leftColumns
                              13      info.repr[c]=unnestLeft.repr[c]
                              15   // Unnest the iteration side and add the corresponding columns
                              16   unnestingRight = new Unnesting(info.info)
                              17   unnest(iteration.right, unnestRight, accessingRight)
                              18   for c in info.outerRefs:
                              19      add unnestRight.repr[c] to iteration.rightColumns
                              21 fun unnest(iterationscan, info, accessing):
                              22   // Add the new columns to the scan
                              23   i = iteration operator for iterationscan
                              24   for c in info.outerRefs:
                              25      cb = corresponding column for c in i.leftInput
                              26      add cn:=cb as produced column to iterationscan
                              27      info.repr[c]=cn
                             4.3   Unnesting CTEs
                             Another complication arises if the algebraic expression is not actually a tree, but a DAG,
                             which can occur in CTEs. Consider the query example below:
                                                                                      1
                                                                           2             О“3
                                                                          T                вҲ…;н өнұҗ:COUNT(*)
                                 SELECT *                                                    4
                                 FROM S                                                      н өнұҗ1.н өнұҰ=н өнұҗ2.н өнұҰ
                                 WHERE (WITH CTE AS
                                       (SELECT * FROM T
                                        WHERE T.y<S.x)                                 5             8
                                    SELECT COUNT(*)                                   н өнјҢн өнұҗ1:=н өнұҶ     н өнјҢн өнұҗ2:=н өнұҶ
                                    FROM CTE c1 JOIN CTE c2
                                         ON c1.y=c2.y) = 1
                                                                                            н өнјҺ6
                                                                                             н өнұҶ.н өнұҰ<н өнұҮ.н өнұҘ
                                                                                                7
                                                                                               S
                               In this example we can ignore the fact that     1 has to check for duplicates because О“3 is
                               duplicatefree.WhenexecutingthealgorithmfromSection3.1,н өнјҺ6 isplacedintheaccessing
                               list of  1. But this causes problems when unnesting      4, since we can no longer split that
                               accessing list into left and right, because н өнјҺ6 is reachable over both paths. Furthermore, we
                               would try to unnest the shared part twice, which is also bad because it would add domain
                               scans multiple times.
                               Abetter strategy is to cut the DAG into a set of trees such that shared operators form
                               their own subtrees. Here, н өнјҺ6 would be the root of a new tree, and н өнјҢ5 and н өнјҢ8 would be
                               leaf operations. When collecting accessing operators, we check if they occur in the same
                               tree. If yes, we add them as described before; if not, we instead consider all shared reads
                               as accessing and repeat the procedure. Additionally, one of the shared reads, e.g., the one
                               with the smallest id, is designated to trigger unnesting the shared operator when unnesting
                               reaches it. In this example, this means that accessing(  1) = {н өнјҢ5, н өнјҢ8}, with н өнјҢ5 forwarding
                               the unnesting pass to н өнјҺ6. The end result is the algebra expression shown below:
                                                                                         1
                                                                                         н өнұҮ.н өнұҘ=н өнұҘ1
                                                                                              О“3
                                                                                               {н өнұҘ1};н өнұҗ:COUNT(*)
                                                                                               4
                                                                                               н өнұҗ1.н өнұҰ=н өнұҗ2.н өнұҰвҲ§н өнұҘ1=н өнұҘ2
                                   SELECT *                                                 5             8
                                   FROM S                                                 н өнјҢн өнұҗ1:=н өнұҶ,     н өнјҢн өнұҗ2:=н өнұҶ,
                                   WHERE (WITH CTE AS                                       н өнұҘ1:=н өнұҮ.н өнұҘ    н өнұҘ2:=н өнұҮ.н өнұҘ
                                          (SELECT * FROM T
                                           WHERE T.y<S.x)                                          6
                                       SELECT COUNT(*)                                           н өнјҺ
                                       FROM CTE c1 JOIN CTE c2                                     н өнұҶ.н өнұҰ<н өнұҮ.н өнұҘ
                                           ON c1.y=c2.y) = 1
                                                                                             О 9              7
                                                                                               н өнұҘ           S
                                                                                2
                                                                               T
                               4.4   Unnesting ORDERBYLIMIT
                               SubquerieswithORDER BYandLIMITorOFFSEThavetobechangedduringunnestingbecause
                               nowthelimit has to be enforced per value of the outer bindings instead of globally. In the
                               Umbrasystem,thesort operator offers that functionality natively, which makes unnesting
                               simple, but other systems will want to rewrite a (sub-)query like this
                                   SELECT *
                                   FROM S
                                   ORDER BY x LIMIT l OFFSET o
                               into the equivalent window query:
                         SELECT *
                         FROM (SELECT *, ROW_NUMBER() OVER (ORDER BY x) AS RN FROM S) S
                         WHERE RN BETWEEN o+1 AND l+o
                      Nowunnesting becomes straightforward; we simply have to add the outer references as
                      PARTITION BY entries to the OVER clause.
                      5  Evaluation
                      Query unnesting improves the asymptotic complexity of query execution by eliminating
                      the quadratic runtime overhead of dependent joins. Therefore, we can easily demonstrate
                      arbitrary performance gains by simply increasing the dataset size. This makes performance
                      experiments a bit pointless, as the impact is so huge. To illustrate this point, consider the
                      example query from Figure 1. This query needs over 26 minutes on TPC-H SF1 when
                      executed in Postgres 16 on a Ryzen 9 7950X3D with 128GB RAM. After applying our
                      algorithm, Postgres can execute the query in 1.3s, a speed-up of more than 1000x.
                      Weobserveasimilar effect when comparing the unnesting algorithm from [NK15] with
                      our new top-down formulation. As a demonstration query, we use the query from Figure 1
                      and add c_comment=l_comment to the last WHERE clause, which brings it into a similar shape
                      as the problematic case from Section 2.3. When executing the query in the Umbra system
                      whenusingtheoldunnestinglogic,thequeryisterminatedafterexhausting120GBofmain
                      memory. Using the new top-down formulation it Е‘nishes in 33ms on the same machine.
                      Again this is a speed-up of several orders of magnitude at least, when comparing the time
                      until the original unnested plan was cancelled.
                      Similarly, for the original query from Sam Arch that motivated this work, which is procbench
                      UDFQuery18[GR21]afterpassingthroughApfel[FHG22]:Theunnestingstrategy from
                      [NK15] leads to memory exhaustion, while with our new top-down unnesting Umbra
                      answers the query in 251ms on TPC-DS SF1.
                      6  Related Work
                      TheЕ‘rst unnesting rules were given as transformations of the SQL representation [Ki82,
                      JK84],whichwereeasytounderstandandwereintegratedintoseveralcommercialdatabase
                      systems. Famously, the original rules proposed by Kim contained the count bug, which
                      led to wrong results for empty inputs. This was corrected by Kiessling [Ki85]. However,
                      fundamentally these rules all suffer from the fact that they can address speciЕ‘c patterns
                      of queries but fail to cover all cases. There has been a lot of follow-up work on adding
                      newrules to cover even more cases, but none of them were complete. The magic set based
                      technique from IBM [Se96] can be used to tackle the runtime aspect of dependent joins by
                      introducing semi joins with the domain of the outer bindings, conceptually similar to the
                                join with н өн°· in our approach. While this helps to speed up query processing, that paper does
                                not provide a mechanism to fully eliminate dependent joins. A later generalization allowed
                                for the elimination of dependent joins if the subquery contains an aggregation function
                                [Zu03]. The Е‘rst approach to provide a complete solution was [NK15], which we already
                                discussed in Section 2 and upon which this work builds. However, while that approach is
                                conceptually complete, it does not describe all SQL constructs, and it runs into problems if
                                dependent joins are nested. We address both limitations in this work.
                                The need for automatic unnesting has increased in recent years because an increasing
                                numberofqueries are machine-generated and some of these generators produce correlated
                                subqueries. A recent example is the Apfel transpiler [FHG22] that can translate stored
                                procedures from PSQL into pure SQL. This transformation is very attractive because it
                                eliminates the need to provide a dedicated PSQL implementation, and the resulting queries
                                are actually faster than the original PSQL code. This requires that the database system can
                                unnest correlated subqueries efficiently.
                                7   Conclusion
                                Unnesting correlated subqueries is essential for handling subqueries efficiently. Eliminating
                                the correlation improves the asymptotic complexity, and can easily lead to speedups by
                                several orders of magnitude. In this work, we have extended our previous work on bottom-up
                                decorrelation by correctly handling nested dependent joins and by supporting a wider range
                                of SQL constructs. The new approach has already been integrated into our Umbra system
                                and we hope that other systems like DuckDB and Postgres will follow.
                                Acknowledgments:WethankAltanBirlerforprovidingtheunnestingstrategyforfullouter
                                joins with correlated predicates.
                                Bibliography
                                [FGL24] Fejza, Amela; GenevГЁs, Pierre; LayaГҜda, Nabil: Efficient Enumeration of Recursive Plans
                                          in Transformation-based Query Optimizers. Proc. VLDB Endow., 17(11):3095Еӣ3108,
                                          2024.
                                [FHG22] Fischer, Tim; Hirn, Denis; Grust, Torsten: Snakes on a Plan: Compiling Python Functions
                                          into Plain SQL Queries. In (Ives, Zachary G.; Bonifati, Angela; Abbadi, Amr El, eds):
                                          SIGMODвҖҷ22:International Conference on Management of Data, Philadelphia, PA, USA,
                                          June 12 - 17, 2022. ACM, pp. 2389Еӣ2392, 2022.
                                [FMN23] Fent, Philipp; Moerkotte, Guido; Neumann, Thomas: Asymptotically Better Query Opti-
                                          mization Using Indexed Algebra. Proc. VLDB Endow., 16(11):3018Еӣ3030, 2023.
                                [Fr24]    Franz, Kai; Arch, Samuel; Hirn, Denis; Grust, Torsten; Mowry, Todd C.; Pavlo, Andrew:
                                          Dear User-DeЕ‘ned Functions, Inlining isnвҖҷt working out so great for us. LetвҖҷs try batching
                                         to makeourrelationshipwork.Sincerely,SQL. In:14thConferenceonInnovativeDataSys-
                                         tems Research, CIDR 2024, Chaminade, HI, USA, January 14-17, 2024. www.cidrdb.org,
                                         2024.
                               [G.20]    G. Moerkotte: Building Query Compilers. http://pi3.informatik.uni-mannheim.de/~moer/
                                         querycompiler.pdf, 2020.
                               [GR21]    Gupta, Surabhi; Ramachandra, Karthik: Procedural Extensions of SQL: Understanding
                                         their usage in the wild. Proc. VLDB Endow., 14(8):1378Еӣ1391, 2021.
                               [JK84]    Jarke, Matthias; Koch, JГјrgen: Query Optimization in Database Systems. ACM Comput.
                                         Surv., 16(2):111Еӣ152, 1984.
                               [Ki82]    Kim, Won: On Optimizing an SQL-like Nested Query. ACM Trans. Database Syst.,
                                         7(3):443Еӣ469, 1982.
                               [Ki85]    KieГҹling, Werner: On Semantic Reefs and Efficient Processing of Correlation Queries with
                                         Aggregates. In: VLDBвҖҷ85, Proceedings of 11th International Conference on Very Large
                                         Data Bases, August 21-23, 1985, Stockholm, Sweden. pp. 241Еӣ250, 1985.
                               [MN11]    Moerkotte, Guido; Neumann, Thomas: Accelerating Queries with Group-By and Join by
                                         Groupjoin. Proc. VLDB Endow., 4(11):843Еӣ851, 2011.
                               [Ne24]    Neumann,Thomas:AFormalizationofTop-DownUnnesting,2024. https://arxiv.org/abs/
                                         2412.04294.
                               [NK15]    Neumann, Thomas; Kemper, Alfons: Unnesting Arbitrary Queries. In (Seidl, Thomas;
                                         Ritter, Norbert; SchГ¶ning, Harald; Sattler, Kai-Uwe; HГӨrder, Theo; Friedrich, Steffen;
                                         Wingerath, Wolfram, eds): Datenbanksysteme fГјr Business, Technologie und Web (BTW),
                                         16. Fachtagung des GI-Fachbereichs "Datenbanken und Informationssysteme"(DBIS),
                                         4.-6.3.2015 in Hamburg, Germany. Proceedings. volume P-241 of LNI. GI, pp. 383Еӣ402,
                                         2015.
                               [NLK17] Neumann, Thomas; Leis, Viktor; Kemper, Alfons: The Complete Story of Joins (in
                                         HyPer). In (Mitschang, Bernhard; Nicklas, Daniela; Leymann, Frank; SchГ¶ning, Harald;
                                         Herschel, Melanie; Teubner, Jens; HГӨrder, Theo; Kopp, Oliver; Wieland, Matthias, eds):
                                         Datenbanksysteme fГјr Business, Technologie und Web (BTW 2017), 17. Fachtagung
                                         des GI-Fachbereichs Datenbanken und Informationssysteme (DBIS), 6.-10. MГӨrz 2017,
                                         Stuttgart, Germany, Proceedings. volume P-265 of LNI. GI, pp. 31Еӣ50, 2017.
                               [Pa17]    Passing, Linnea; Then, Manuel; Hubig, Nina C.; Lang, Harald; Schreier, Michael; GГјn-
                                         nemann, Stephan; Kemper, Alfons; Neumann, Thomas: SQL- and Operator-centric Data
                                         Analytics in Relational Main-Memory Databases. In: Proceedings of the 20th International
                                         Conference on Extending Database Technology, EDBT 2017, Venice, Italy, March 21-24,
                                         2017. OpenProceedings.org, pp. 84Еӣ95, 2017.
                               [Se96]    Seshadri, Praveen; Hellerstein, Joseph M.; Pirahesh, Hamid; Leung, T. Y. Cliff; Ramakrish-
                                         nan, Raghu; Srivastava, Divesh; Stuckey, Peter J.; Sudarshan, S.: Cost-Based Optimization
                                         for Magic: Algebra and Implementation. In (Jagadish, H. V.; Mumick, Inderpal Singh,
                                         eds): Proceedings of the 1996 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management
                                         of Data, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, June 4-6, 1996. ACM Press, pp. 435Еӣ446, 1996.
                             [Zu03]    Zuzarte, Calisto; Pirahesh, Hamid; Ma, Wenbin; Cheng, Qi; Liu, Linqi; Wong, Kwai:
                                       WinMagic:SubqueryElimination Using Window Aggregation. In (Halevy, Alon Y.; Ives,
                                       Zachary G.; Doan, AnHai, eds): Proceedings of the 2003 ACM SIGMOD International
                                       Conference on Management of Data, San Diego, California, USA, June 9-12, 2003. ACM,
                                       pp. 652Еӣ656, 2003.
